gaayam 2 (transl.the wound - 2) is a 2010 telugu-language crime film, produced by dr. c. dharmakartha on kartha creations, presented by ram gopal varma and directed by praveen sri. jagapathi babu, vimala raman  and the music is composed by ilayaraja. it is a sequel to the 1993 telugu film gaayam.


== plot ==
ram (jagapathi babu) is a restaurant owner in bangkok. ram leads his life happily with his wife vidya (vimala raman) and adopted son chaitanya (child artist pavansriram). one day, psychopath killers attempt to molest a female worker at ram"s restaurant. to protect her, ram shoots them. this rescue turns ram a hero before the media.
gurunarayana (kota srinivasa rao) shocks to see ram, who is quite similar to durga (jagapathi babu), an arch-rival who was declared dead long ago. gurunarayana's son shankar narayana (kota prasad) leaves for bangkok along with their lawyer saab (tanikella bharani) to find out whether he is ram or durga. shankar narayana kidnaps chaitanya. this irks ram, and he opens up his identity by injuring shankar narayana and killing a person in front of vidya.
saab takes shankar narayana back to india. vidya deserts ram as he concealed his identity that he was once a killer and goon. but pandyan (jeeva), the bangkok police officer of indian origin convinces her that durga turned ram and is leading a normal, peaceful life only to keep himself off from bloodshed. ram reveals his flashback to vidya that chaitanya is the son of anitha (revathi) he lost chitra, anitha and bharadwaj in a bomb blast which has planted by guru narayana for the revenge for his arrest. while dying anitha takes word from durga to change his ways for her son's sake then he decided to leave that life he changed identity and shifted to bangkok.
at a time when it is going to be a happy reunion, gurunarayana's men attack ram and his family, and chaitanya gets badly injured.
in order to put a full stop to the bloodshed, ram goes india as durga and clears off the rivalry with gurunarayana. he sends vidya and chaitanya to pandyan's house and returns to india. meanwhile, guru narayana now a ex-minister is again making plans to take over chief minister place and again makes non-allied group and decided to brake the government again through public riots for his aspirations.
durga kills his men to stop him then shanker narayana hides from durga then to save his son guru narayana appoints a new gangster called aziz pasha (ajay) to kill durga. then the power struggle begins again between both the gangs. finally durga came to know that there is a mole in his gang and he finds out that he is one of his cop friend (ravi kale) who helped to change his identity and shifted to foreign. he reveals his family was under shakar narayana's mens control if he was not cooperated they will kill them anytime that's why he leaked his moves every time. durga uses this as an opportunity and leaks a wrong information through him that the lawyer saab is the mole in his gang. then shakar comes out from his hideout and kills lawyer saab then durga reveals it was his trap to kill shankar narayana. later in a chase he successfully kills shanker narayana and saves his friend's family.
after knowing his son's death guru narayana though feels sad and angry he uses this as an opportunity to gain sympathy for becoming chief minister and creates riots again in the city while trying to stop durga was shot by his own men. in the hospital guru narayana meets durga and confesses his deeds for his aspirations by telling the peoples are fools. then durga reveals that actually it was his trap to make him confess in live unknown of him to the public which exposed him again and later durga takes revenge for killing of his family by killing guru narayana.
finally film ends with durga now became a god father in the city by tries to resolve in idealistic manner with a rationalist approach along with  his wife and son.


== cast ==
jagapathi babu as ram/durga
vimala raman as vidya
kota srinivasa rao as guru narayan
tanikella bharani as lawyer saab
kota prasad as shankar narayan
ravi kalle as acp murthy
raghunatha reddy as i.g
harsha vardhan as harsha
sivakrishna as inspector bharadwaj (cameo role)
jeeva as pandyan
revathi as anitha (cameo role)
ajay as aziz pasha
annapoorna
pavansriram as chaitanya


== soundtrack ==
the music for the film was composed by ilaiyaraaja and released by aditya music company.


== references ==


== external links ==
gaayam 2 at imdb