poi (english: the lie) is a 2006 tamil-language film, directed by k. balachander in his 101st and final film.


== plot ==
valluvanar (avinash) is an upright political leader in tamil nadu who is much respected for his honesty and uprightness, and he refuses to compromise on this trait, even when his only son kamban (uday kiran) finds himself in jail for no fault of his. the opposition party takes advantage of the situation and bails out kamban, who joins the party, much to his father's embarrassment. the media laps it up, sensationalizing it further. kamban decides to leave the country until things cool down. only his mother vasuki (anuradha krishnamurthy), with whom he is close, is aware of this plan. kamban arrives at sri lanka where he befriends banerjee (badava gopi), a bengali, and stays with him. one day, he finds a tamil literary book on the beach, which he traces to shilpa (vimala raman), the owner of the book. shilpa is a college student preparing for civil services examination. the film juggles between reality and fiction, where theepori, the fictitious father image of kamban, advises him to fall in love. that sets in rolling the love story as kamban persists in wooing shilpa. she is staying with her brother's family. shilpa is keen on realizing her ambitions and feels that love and marriage often comes in the way of women's career. the rest of the story is about the emotional conflict between her career and love. after vasuki's death, valluvanar reaches sri lanka. kamban is unaware of his mother's death. shilpa's family meets valluvanar. meanwhile, kamban goes to meet shilpa to hand over the passport, but due to his friend's lie, he ends up thinking that shilpa committed suicide. how the lie told to reunite the lovers gives the tragic end is the end of the story.


== cast ==
uday kiran as kamban
vimala raman as shilpa
geetu mohandas as ramya
sridhar as roshan
adithya menon as vishnu
avinash as valluvanar
prakash raj as vidhi (fate)
renuka as menaka
badava gopi as banerjee
anuradha krishnamurthy as vasuki
k. balachander (cameo appearance)
samuthirakani (cameo appearance)


== soundtrack ==
music was composed by vidyasagar.


== production ==
the film was launched in 2005 at the eve of kb's 75th birthday. there were rumors that rajini and kamal would appear in cameo appearances but proved false. telugu actor udaykiran was selected to play the lead role making his debut in tamil and vimala raman who was brought up in australia was selected as heroine. geethu mohandas who earlier appeared in nala damayanthi was selected to appear in this film making "poi" her second and last film in tamil. k balachander and prakshraj themselves acted in this film. there were rumours that jayashree of "thendral ennai thodu" fame would appear in this film which became false.


== release ==
the film was originally scheduled to release on 6 october 2006, distributors were initially reluctant to take the film as they felt that subject was outdated but aascar films procured the rights. release was postponed to diwali but finally released in december


=== critical reception ===
rediff wrote:"poi is a case in point  you expect so much from balachander, a genuine icon of tamil filmdom; if you leave adulation aside, though, you have to say that his latest film disappoints". nowrunning wrote:"poi lacks the marks of kb's earlier films".


== references ==


== external links ==
poi at rotten tomatoes