23rd march 1931: shaheed is a 2002 indian hindi historical  biographical film about bhagat singh, directed by guddu dhanoa which depicts the events leading up to the hanging of indian freedom fighter bhagat singh and his companions rajguru and sukhdev on 23 march 1931. the film stars bobby deol as bhagat singh, his elder brother sunny deol as chandrashekhar azad and amrita singh in her comeback role as bhagat singh's mother.
the film's release coincided with another film based on bhagat singh directed by rajkumar santoshi and titled the legend of bhagat singh.


== plot ==
set in the mid-1920s, british india, the film tells the story of freedom fighters bhagat singh and chandrashekhar azad who have only one motive in mind: freedom for india. they set about doing this task together with two other men, sukhdev and rajguru. bhagat singh is enraged when his mentor lala lajpat rai is mercilessly beaten to death by the police, and he sets about to avenge his death. he and his colleagues do succeed in killing one of the officials responsible, but they are identified, and as a result, bhagat and rajguru are arrested and held in prison, where they are tortured relentlessly.
when produced in court, they dramatically admit to the killing and claim that it was done in the name of freedom. the judge and the public prosecutor do not see it that their way, and they are sentenced to life in prison. bhagat's mother, vidya, comes to meet him in prison, and he goes to greet her, shackled in chains from head to toe, and he foretells that india will continue to suffer, even after independence from the british, and that he will return in another birth to free his motherland. subsequently, all three are charged with treason and assassination and are sentenced to death.


== cast ==
sunny deol as chandrashekhar azad
bobby deol as bhagat singh
amrita singh as vidyavati kaur
ranjan koshal as kishan singh
rahul dev as sukhdev
vicki ahuja as rajguru
divya dutta as durga bhabhi
vivek shauq as bhagwati charan vohra
sachin khedekar as advocate asaf ali
vivek k. rawat as batukeshwar dutt
suresh oberoi as jailor chaddha
shakti kapoor as chattar singh
raja bundela as lala lajpat rai
akshay anand as ram prasad bismil
suresh chatwal as kishori lal
imran khan as kartar singh sarabha
deepak sharma as jatindra nath das
sanjay tripathi as hans raj vohra
raman khatri as ashfaqulla khan
rana jung bahadur as lawyer
tej sapru as dilbagh singh
indal singh as jaigopal
samaresh routray as yashpal
rajesh khera as sardar ajit singh
manoj tiwari as veerbhadra tiwari
aishwariya rai as mannewali (special appearance in song "jogiya ve")


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
23rd march 1931: shaheed at imdb