3 geezers! is a 2013 american comedy film directed by michelle schumacher and starring j. k. simmons, tim allen, scott caan, breckin meyer, randy couture and basil hoffman. it was the second collaboration between allen and couture, after the 2008 martial arts drama film, redbelt.


== premise ==
follow actor j kimball as he researches what it's like to be old for a role in an upcoming movie. when he meets the residents at the coconuts convalescent home, he quickly discovers that his perceptions of the elderly may be off from today's reality. after being on the wrong end of some pranks, j enlists the help of his hollywood friends to turn the tides. mayhem ensues.


== cast ==
j. k. simmons as j kimball
basil hoffman as victor
tim allen as tim
scott caan as scott
lou beatty jr. as bernard
breckin meyer as breckin
randy couture as randy
mike o'malley as mike
sam raimi as sam
kevin pollak as kevin
robin bain as kari
courtenay taylor as lisa
fernanda romero as tiffany
ruth williamson as art instructor
daniel montgomery as assistant game master


== reception ==
critical reception for 3 geezers! has been overwhelmingly negative. on metacritic the film has a rating of 9 out of 100 based on 5 reviews, indicating overwhelming dislike.news outlets such as the los angeles times and the new york times panned the film overall, with both reviewers criticizing the movie's humor as un-funny and the reviewer for the new york times commented that "this film makes the dreadful tv show betty white's off their rockers seem sophisticated." the hollywood reporter echoed these sentiments, stating that "barely managing to fill its brief running time despite its surfeit of smuttily vulgar gags, 3 geezers! proves a less than subtle argument for euthanasia." slant magazine gave a slightly more positive review, remarking that the film's approach was "a creative one that makes the material easier to swallow, but it doesn't change the fact that this is basically a single joke on repeat for a stretched-out 80 minutes, and whether it's funny or well told is eventually beside the point."


== references ==


== external links ==
3 geezers! at imdb
3 geezers! at allmovie
3 geezers! at metacritic
3 geezers! at rotten tomatoes