8 seconds is a 1994 american contemporary western biographical drama film directed by john g. avildsen. its title refers to the length of time a bull rider is required to stay on for a ride to be scored. it stars luke perry as american rodeo legend lane frost and focuses on his life and career as a bull riding champion. it also features stephen baldwin as tuff hedeman, and red mitchell as cody lambert.
the film was completed and premiered shortly after what would have been frost's 30th birthday, in late 1993.


== plot ==
while growing up in oklahoma, young lane frost (cameron finley) learns the tricks of the bull riding trade at the hand of his father, clyde (james rebhorn), an accomplished rodeo bronco rider himself. as he enters his teenage and early adult years, lane (luke perry) travels the western rodeo circuit with his best friends tuff hedeman (stephen baldwin) and cody lambert (red mitchell). he meets and falls in love with a young barrel racer, kellie kyle (cynthia geary), and they eventually marry in 1984.
as lane's legend and fame increase, so does the amount of pressure he puts on himself, to be what everyone wants him to be, and he wants to show that he is as good as they say he is. his ascent to the world championship is marred by a cheating incident, questions about kellie's devotion, and a near broken neck. the film also follows him through the true life series between himself and red rock, a bull that no cowboy had ever been able to stay on for 8 seconds. it cuts the series down to three rides. in 1989, he is the second-to-last rider at the cheyenne frontier days rodeo. while riding on the bull known as "takin' care of business", he dismounts after his 8-second ride but the bull turns back and hits him in the side with his horn, breaking some ribs and severing a main artery. as a result of excessive internal bleeding, he dies on the arena floor before he can be transported to the hospital.
the final scene shows hedeman later that same year at the national finals rodeo riding for the world championship. after the 8 second bell sounds, he continues to ride and stays on an additional 8 seconds as a tribute to his fallen best friend.


== cast ==
luke perry as lane frost
cameron finley as young lane frost
stephen baldwin as tuff hedeman
red mitchell as cody lambert
cynthia geary as kellie kyle frost
james rebhorn as clyde frost
carrie snodgress as elsie frost
linden ashby as martin hudson
ronnie claire edwards as carolyn kyle
rene zellweger as buckle bunny
george michael as himself
brooks & dunn as themselves
mcbride & the ride as themselves
vince gill as himself
karla bonoff as herself


== production ==
filming took place in mainly in boerne, texas, del rio, texas, tucson rodeo grounds, san antonio and pendleton, oregon and a handful of other minor locations.


== reception ==
the film gained a mixed reception. 
the milwaukee journal praised perry's acting but criticized the performance of cynthia geary, who played kellie frost. it holds a 31% rating from rotten tomatoes based on 13 reviews.


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
8 seconds at imdb
8 seconds at box office mojo
8 seconds at rotten tomatoes