99 is a 2009 indian hindi-language crime comedy film directed by raj and d.k., starring kunal khemu, boman irani, soha ali khan and cyrus broacha. the movie is set in the year 1999, with cricket controversies of that year as the backdrop. it was produced and distributed by "people pictures", and was released on 15 may 2009.


== plot ==
sachin (kunal khemu) and zaramud (cyrus broacha) are two small-time crooks in mumbai, who make a living out of duplicating mobile phone sim cards. due to the overuse of a duplicated sim by a customer, the sim card company and the police are alerted. when the police raid their premises, they destroy all their equipment and escape. in the cat-and-mouse chase that follows, zaramud breaks into a car along with sachin to lay the police off their trail. however, the car meets with an accident. although sachin and zaramud manage to escape with minor injuries, the car is damaged beyond repair. agm (mahesh manjrekar), a bookie based out of mumbai, is the owner of this car, and tracks them down. they are hired to work for agm till the time they are capable of paying the compensation for the damages.
rahul (boman irani), an executive in a currency exchange company in delhi, has a penchant for betting and gambling. rahul visits mumbai on a conference, and decides to bet on the outcome of an india vs new zealand cricket match that was on that day. he visits agm, who he was referred to by a bookie in delhi by the name of bhuval ram kuber (amit mistry), and bets inr 2,000,000 on india winning the match. however, india loses. in spite of owing money to agm, rahul continues in his gambling ways and plays teen patti with jc (vinod khanna), who is a big and powerful businessman and bookie. after rahul goes all-in and jc raises on the bet, rahul identifies jc is bluffing, and decides to call the bet. rahul ends up winning, but jc jokingly vows to beat rahul some day.
sachin and zaramud become agm's trusted aides. they prepare a list of individuals who owe money to agm. top of this list is kewal pandey (raja kapse), a bhojpuri film actor, and next on the list is rahul. since rahul is based out of delhi and outside the area of agm's operations, agm sends sachin and zaramud to delhi to retrieve the money rahul owes him. they reach delhi and put up in a 5 star hotel. sachin develops a liking towards pooja (soha ali khan), who is a floor manager in the hotel. the two bond over their mutual desire of owning an independent business and be their own boss, and sachin informs pooja about his idea of owning a coffee-shop someday and 'scoring a century in life'.
the next morning, rahul is met with kuber and his solitary goon dimple (rajesh singh) demanding inr 700,000 that rahul owes kuber. when he is unable to pay the money back, rahul gets beaten up and his phone is taken away. next day, sachin and zaramud visit rahul at his office to demand agm's money. when they reach his office, rahul had just received a payment of usd 50,000 from a client, and assuming that he had a buffer of 34 days before paying the amount back, rahul hid the money in a secret compartment of his briefcase. sachin and zaramud find the money in his briefcase, and decide to take that as payment for agm in spite of objections from rahul. however, on their way to the airport, all their belongings along the briefcase filled with money gets stolen. however, the thieves are unable to find the money in the secret compartment, and the briefcase ends up in the godown of the a salesman (pitobash), who sells stolen goods outside rahul's office.
sachin and zaramud go back to rahul to inform about the debacle. rahul reveals that he has a hunch that jc is privy to the outcome of the next india vs south africa cricket match, and if they could bet on the same team jc bets on, they would surely win. sachin decides to leverage the list of agm's debtors to collect the funds needed to place the bet. the three of them visit kewal pandey, and are able to extract half of what he owed to agm, which is sufficient for their purpose. in the meantime, kuber visits rahul again, but this time gets badly beaten up by sachin, who also manages to get rahul's phone back. rahul goes to the bar where he plays cards with jc, and strikes up a conversation with him in a bid to extract information about the match next day. jc obliges, and as a return favour to rahul for having helped him win a hand against a third opponent, he asks rahul to bet on south africa as a key player on the indian side had agreed to throw the match in exchange for money received from him. 
kuber informs agm that rahul had gotten him beaten up by two of his 'cousins' from mumbai, and agm deciphers that these cousins are none other than sachin and zaramud. agm sends one of his goons to delhi after them, and himself follows suit. on the day of the match, rahul leaves to place a bet on south africa. kuber reaches sachin's room along with agm's goon and kidnaps him. sachin gets badly beaten up, but then manages to trick them and knocking kuber and agm's goon unconscious, escapes. pooja and zaramud meet him at the hotel bar, where they follow the proceedings of the match. india manages to win 
on the back of a brilliant century by tendulkar and some errors on the field by south africa. the three of them are distraught. however, rahul returns and informs them that he had seen through jc's bluff again and had betted on india, along with a side bet on tendulkar. he gives sachin an address where he would receive the winnings.
sachin visits a garments shop in palika bazar to collect the money. zaramud discovers through recorded conversations on jc's sim that they had duplicated that the match was fixed on the side of the south africans, and jc was behind it. he hands over the recordings to the cbi. sachin gets chased by the police immediately after he receives the bag full of money. he manages to reach his hotel room, although the police also follow him to the hotel. he finds agm waiting in the room, and hands over the bag to agm after agm agrees never to bother zaramud, rahul or him again. he also lends his jacket to agm, which was a marker to the police for the identity of the person they were after. as agm reaches the hotel lobby, he is cornered by a group of policemen. there are sounds of shots being fired, indicating that agm is either caught or killed.
kuber visits rahul again to demand his money, and threatens him with a loaded revolver. in a fit of rage, rahul snatches the revolver from kuber and accidentally shoots him through his palm. kuber is shocked, and takes rahul's old car both as payment and for getting to the hospital. soon after, the car crashes. salesman visits rahul at the office with the stolen briefcase, recognizing it to be his. rahul finds the money intact in the secret compartment. elsewhere, as sachin and zaramud checkout of the hotel to go back to mumbai, they are encountered by kewal pandey, who gives them the remaining half of the money he owed to agm.
as the end credits roll, it is revealed that sachin and pooja have opened a coffee-shop, zaramud has become a poster boy for fitness, and the recorded conversations from jc's sim had helped unearth the match-fixing scandal that had rocked the cricketing world in the year 2000.


== cast ==
kunal khemu as sachin
boman irani as rahul
soha ali khan as pooja
cyrus broacha as zaramud
simone singh as jahnavi
mahesh manjrekar as agm
vinod khanna as jc
sudesh berry as sunil mehta
amit mistry as kuber
pitobash as sales man
dali vivekanandan as ray ban
divya bhatnagar as item 'rakhee'


== crew ==
director: krishna dk and raj nidimoru
producer: anupam mittal, aditya shastri
executive producer: pooja desai
line producer : sudesh nanu
music: ashu
sound designer: stephen gomes
editor: cheragh todiwala
director of photography: rajeev ravi
story & screenplay: krishna dk, raj nidimoru and sita menon
dialogues: raja sen, sita menon and chintan gandhi


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
the movie received positive reviews from the press.

rediff.com gave the film 4 stars and told the viewers that "they will leave the theater laughing and entertained."
indiatimes.com gave it 3.5 stars.
nikhat kazmi of the times of india gave the movie 3 out of 5 stars stating that it has "a tangy, tongue-in-cheek tenor that ensures you never really lose the plot."
taran adarsh said, "99 is smart, good looking and interesting, in parts. the film holds appeal for the youth and multiplex audiences".
real bollywood: "intricately woven", "extremely entertaining" said "director duo have done a fantastic job" (3.5 stars).
noyon jyoti parasara of aol india gave 99 3 out of 5 and said "the characters are fed with lively and spontaneous dialogues that make you smile or even laugh every once in a while."
boxoffice.com said the "bollywood flick should catch on with american audiences" and that "99 has potential to set new standard."


=== box office ===
the film was released on 15 may 2009 worldwide with about 500 prints. 99 had a slow start on friday with 1015%. business picked up as reports were mainly positive. the film was a moderate box office success and was expected to find its patronage among the youth and the multiplex audiences to whom it is targeted.


== music ==


=== reception ===
the film's music received mixed reviews from critics. indiatimes gave the soundtrack three stars out of four, saying the songs "what's up", "soch mat dobara", "punjab size" were average while praising "kal ki tarah" and "delhi destiny". bollywood hungama's joginder tuteja gave the album two and a half stars out of five.


=== soundtrack ===


== references ==


== external links ==
99 at imdb