a boy, a girl and a bike is a 1949 british romantic comedy film directed by ralph smart and starring john mccallum, honor blackman and patrick holt. the film's art direction was by george provis. the film concerns the romantic escapades and adventures of a yorkshire cycling club.


== plot ==
young couple sue (honor blackman) and sam (patrick holt) are members of a yorkshire cycling club, the wakeford wheelers. romantic complications ensue when wealthy david (john mccallum) becomes smitten with sue, and joins the club to pursue her, much to sam's dismay.
the film is set in wakeford and in the yorkshire dales. it features cycle sabotage and cycling tactics.


== cast ==
john mccallum as david howarth
honor blackman as susie bates
patrick holt as sam walters
diana dors as ada foster
maurice denham as bill martin
leslie dwyer as steve hall
anthony newley as charlie ritchie
megs jenkins as nan ritchie
john blythe as frank martin
hal osmond as mr. bates
thora hird as mrs. bates
amy veness as grandma bates
maggie hanley as ginger
cyril chamberlain as bert gardner
barry letts as syd
vera cook as helen gardner
julien mitchell as mr. howarth
alison leggatt as mrs. howarth
lyn evans as policeman in cafe
margot bourke as mary bates
geoffrey best as harry
john howlett as alf pearson
patrick halstead as willie
joan seton as beryl howarth
dennis peck as norman bates
vera williams as jill bates
bernard hepton as cyclist
gerald lawson as dog seller
barbara murray
valerie pearson as cyclist
charles saynor as policeman
marianne stone
ben williams as new houseowner


== production ==
the film was based on an original idea by sydney box, who was head of production at gainsborough. box came up with the idea while out for a sunday drive, and gave the job of writing the script to ted willis, who had worked for box on the scripts for holiday camp and the huggett's abroad and had the reputation for someone who could write for working class characters. the film was originally called wheels within wheelsrichard attenborough was meant to play a key role but was held up making the guinea pig; patrick holt played his part instead.in march 1948 smart was scouting locations in yorkshire. filming took place in september 1948. it happened on location in yorkshire at places including wakefield, hebden bridge, skipton and at gainsborough's studio in shepherd's bush.


== critical reception ==
variety called it "feeble... valueless for the us market."the monthly film bulletin" called it a "simple unpretentious story enlivened by flashes of homely yorkshire humour."
the radio times gave the film two out of five stars, calling it, "a minor, good-natured british comedy romance."


== references ==


== bibliography ==
spicer, andrew. sydney box. manchester university press, 2006.


== external links ==
a boy, a girl and a bike at imdb
a boy a girl and a bike at bfi
a boy a girl and a bike at letterbox dvd