a bunch of amateurs is a 2008 british comedy film directed by andy cadiff, and stars burt reynolds, derek jacobi, alistair petrie and samantha bond. in november 2008, the premiere in leicester square was attended by elizabeth ii. the screenplay was written by nick newman, john ross, ian hislop and jonathan gershfield.


== plot ==
a washed-up hollywood star is flown to england to play the title role in king lear at "stratford" believing he will be appearing onstage at the legendary rsc in stratford-upon-avon, the birthplace of william shakespeare. instead he finds he has signed on with the "stratford players" in the suffolk village of stratford st john. he goes to the united kingdom with his career deteriorating and having problems with his daughter who is an aspiring actress on the fringes of the new york theatre. the local villagers are somewhat of a motley crew and are naturally delighted to have such an - albeit unsuccessful - star playing with them.  reynolds plays a typically selfish american with no time for manners, and displays an appalling lack of class, considering himself too big for this lowly setting.  the transition to humble actor, happy to play with the british actors takes some time, but eventually he is reconciled with his estranged daughter and realises that he is no better, in terms of talent and intelligence, than his amateur colleagues.


== cast ==
burt reynolds as jefferson steele
samantha bond as dorothy nettle
imelda staunton as mary
derek jacobi as nigel dewberry
camilla arfwedson as amanda blacke
charles durning as charlie rosenberg
lorraine ashbourne as janine jarvis
gemma lawrence as verity nettle
peter gunn as frank dobbins
tony jayawardena as kevin patel
alistair petrie as rupert twisk
peter wight as mike bell
kelly price as lauren bell
surendra kochar as kevin's mum
kirsty more as school girl


== reception ==
the film was universally panned by critics, with criticism mostly focusing on the film's stale humour and burt reynolds's performance. it holds a 0% critical score on rotten tomatoes based on 2 reviews (as of september 2015).


== references ==


== external links ==
a bunch of amateurs at imdb
a bunch of amateurs at rotten tomatoes