a gentleman: sundar, susheel, risky is a 2017 indian hindi-language action comedy film, written and directed by raj nidimoru and krishna d.k. the film features sidharth malhotra in a dual role opposite jacqueline fernandez, while suniel shetty plays the antagonist.a gentleman was theatrically released in india on 25 august 2017. it received moderate reviews from critics, and failed to recoup its 600 million (us$8.4 million) investment, grossing 383 million (us$5.4 million).


== plot ==
gaurav kapoor (sidharth malhotra), based in suburban miami, plans to marry his colleague kavya (jacqueline fernandez), who happens to be the woman of his dreams, but she prefers a man who is more adventurous and risk-loving.
running parallel to gaurav's life, is the story of clandestine spy rishi purohit (also malhotra), who is seen to have been trying to extract some crucial substance from the chinese embassy in bangkok. however, when a co-spy, yakub (darshan kumaar), shoots down an innocent civilian, the dishonest move enrages rishi. nonetheless, he returns to mumbai, where it is revealed that he works for unit x, a spy organisation headed by colonel vijay kumar saxena (suniel shetty). rishi explains to col. vijay that he can't continue with such routines, and that he wants to start life afresh. col. vijay asks him to perform one last job for him, and this involves spying on a minister who col. vijay claims to be corrupt and wants to blackmail, and copying data from his cellphone into a hard drive which is wanted by col. vijay. rishi does save contents into the hard drive, but col. vijay, having decided that rishi is useless, instructs yakub through a text message to kill him. rishi senses the suspicion, and fights off yakub and the other spies. yakub manages to shoot rishi, destroying the hard drive, but rishi escapes.
gaurav tries to hang out with kavya on a date, and also meets her parents, who consider getting him married to kavya. meanwhile, he is ordered by his boss to visit mumbai to close a business deal. rewinding to rishi's life, he is shown meeting a man named gaurav kapoor, who works in a cyber firm in miami, and has important data about the minister's connections. when gaurav is murdered by yakub on account of being a liability, rishi decides to adopt gaurav's identity to successfully escape from yakub after his last mission. this leads to his present-day life in 2017 as gaurav in a miami software company, thus implying that gaurav is in fact rishi himself, and that the events leading up to his new life took place five years earlier in 2012.
after being unintentionally recorded in a viral video and recognised by the members of unit x, gaurav is soon attacked by koko, an associate of unit x's local contact jignesh. he is forced to abduct and hide koko in his car, which is noticed by his friend dixit (hussain dalal), who tries to help him and unintentionally kills koko in the struggle. yakub and other unit x agents track gaurav down, and confront him, where he finally confesses, as rishi, that he needed a life. he is knocked down unconscious, and soon finds himself handcuffed with kavya who had stopped by his house. gaurav uses his skills to escape with kavya from the trouble, and ends up confessing to her that he is a retired covert operations specialist. kavya berates him, but takes pity on him when she notices his bloody stab wound. the two make love. later that night, the two find themselves under fire after unit x agents, headed by yakub, raid the motel they are hiding in. rishi hatches a quick scheme to retrieve the data, since the hard drive is damaged, and convinces yakub to work with him on their final mission.
rishi executes the heist with success, but security guards take notice and begin chasing rishi. yakub aborts the operation and abandons him. they meet at rishi's house, where rishi kills most of yakub's henchmen with the help of kavya. however, rishi spares yakub and two of his thugs and orders him to leave his house. driving away in rishi's car, yakub realises that the hard drive rishi gave is blank, and the car's trunk contains koko's corpse. dixit, working with rishi, crashes into their car in a side collision, and police arriving on the scene discover the body. yakub and his thugs are killed by the cops as they open fire. col. vijay visits rishi's house to confront him, but is killed in an explosion planned by rishi. this neutralises unit x, and rishi and kavya soon leave the city with new identities of hemant and pooja khanna.
a mid-credits scene shows dixit buying machine guns from a local gun store in miami before putting on a hoodie and walking away.


== cast ==
sidharth malhotra as gaurav kapoor / rishi purohit / hemant khanna
jacqueline fernandez as kavya chetwani / pooja khanna, gauravs love interest
suniel shetty as colonel vijay kumar saxena
darshan kumaar as yakub
hussain dalal as dixit, gaurav's friend and colleague
rajit kapur as mr. chetwani, kavya's father
supriya pilgaonkar as mrs. chetwani, kavya's mother
amit mistry as jignesh patel
sijoy varghese as ramachandra rao
shaheed woods as koko
kushal punjabi as willy
zachary coffin as ceo jim
hemant koumar as robbie
nikita sachdev as nikki
sharad malhotra


== production ==


=== development ===
siddharth anand has stated that the movie was originally envisioned as a sequel to the 2014 film bang bang! however, it was later clarified in an interview that the movie would be a standalone.


=== filming ===
filming began in mid-2016 under the working title reloaded. in september 2016, it was reported that the international shooting schedule of a gentleman: sundar, susheel, risky had been canceled. later it was revealed by a close source that "...there will be another long schedule in december but the location is yet to be finalised. it could be in europe."


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film is composed by sachinjigar while the lyrics have been penned by vayu and priya saraiya. its first song, "disco disco", sung by benny dayal and shirley setia, was released on 17 july 2017.  the second song released, "bandook meri laila", sung by ash king and jigar saraiya and rapped by raftaar and sidharth malhotra, was released on 24 july 2017. the song marks malhotra's singing debut and was the most popular song on the album. the third song, "baat ban jaye", sung by siddharth basrur and priya saraiya, was released on 5 august 2017. the fourth song was a romantic one, "laagi na choote", and was another chartbuster. it was released on 13 august 2017. the last song, "chandralekha", sung by vishal dadlani and jonita gandhi, was released on 24 august 2017. the soundtrack of five songs was released on 24 august 2017 by t-series.

all music is composed by sachinjigar.


== critical reception ==


=== domestic ===
times of india rated the film 3.5 stars out of 5 and concluded, "the film would have been a perfect entertainer had it held its cards closer to its chest. however, it still has plenty bang for your buck."hindustan times gave the film 3 out of 5, saying, "a gentleman is not a flawless film... but raj and dk have managed to narrate the plain and full-of-cliches story in their own quirky style and their dialogues and the screenplay make it fun to watch."


=== uae ===
the movie released on 24 august in dubai, uae. dollz in dubai gave it 3.5 out of 5 stars calling it a masala entertainer and wrote "it's a big step for siddharth malhotra who manages to carry the film and commands the screen with his presence. yes, he's good looking but he pulls off the action sequences really well."


== references ==


== external links ==
a gentleman at imdb
a gentleman on facebook
a gentleman at bollywood hungama