a madea christmas is a 2013 american christmas comedy film directed, written, produced by and starring tyler perry. this is the first christmas themed film from the writer-director. this is the seventeenth film by perry, and the seventh film in the madea franchise. it was released in theaters on december 13, 2013.


== plot ==
in atlanta, georgia, mabel "madea" simmons (tyler perry) has been talked into getting a job at a local store by her great-niece eileen murphy (anna maria horsford). madea gets fired on her first day.
meanwhile, eileen's daughter, lacey williams (tika sumpter), a teacher at a small school in alabama, is married to a  white man named conner (eric lively). the school does not have enough money to fund their annual christmas jubilee, forcing lacey to ask her ex-boyfriend oliver (jr lemon) to fund the school through his business. lacey calls her mother and says she will be unable to come home for christmas, but eileen, determined to see her daughter, brings madea and oliver with her to visit. eileen hopes that lacey and oliver might still work out as a couple; she does not know that lacey is married to a white man, which is not what she wanted for lacey.
lacey brings oliver to a town meeting and asks madea to look after her class. one of the girls steals madeas purse while madea tells the class a rather unorthodox version of the story of the first christmas. when she finds her purse is missing, she loses her temper and ties the guilty party to a cross decoration in the classroom.
conner's parents, buddy (larry the cable guy) and kim (kathy najimy), arrive at conner and lacey's house for christmas and are told to keep the marriage a secret since eileen is staying for christmas as well. eileen offends kim by cutting down her fathers memory tree; though she didnt realize the meaning, she shows no remorse for the act. she is convinced buddy and kim are part of the ku klux klan after seeing buddy with a sheet over his head (though he was merely engaging in foreplay with kim), and promptly bars the door to the room she and madea are sharing.
lacey finds out that the sponsors are forcing the school to make the jubilee a holiday theme as opposed to a christmas theme, and that the sponsors are responsible for many of the towns citizens losing their jobs. angered by these facts, tanner (chad michael murray), a man who consistently gives conner trouble, demands the mayor fire lacey, which the mayor does. laceys conflict at home reaches a boiling point when eileen and kim argue; lacey tells the truth about her marriage to conner, and eileens true feelings about whites are revealed: her husband left her for a white woman (eileen had lied to lacey all those years, saying he was killed by a white man). hypocritically angered by the lies she has heard, eileen storms out, vainly hoping for a taxi to pick her up.
lacey admits to conner that tanner caused her to lose her job, setting conner off. as eileen walks into town, she sees tanner in his overturned, burning truck and saves his life. conner walks up to the scene and punches tanner before demanding eileen get in his truck. tanner then follows conner to apologize for everything and to thank eileen for saving him. eileen also accepts conner and laceys marriage.
at the christmas jubilee, lacey thanks the sponsors and announces their promises to help the town (which were not in the original agreement), knowing the repercussions the company would face if they were to back out. she reveals to oliver that she is married to conner.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack for the film was released in stores by motown records november 25. this was the first soundtrack to a tyler perry film since 2010's for colored girls and the first madea soundtrack since 2006's madea's family reunion and 2008's meet the browns. it featured smokey robinson, mariah carey, brian mcknight, james brown, kem, boyz ii men, kelly rowland, jeremih, stevie wonder, jackson 5, pearl bailey, ashanti, kevin ross & mprynt.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
a madea christmas received negative reviews from critics. on rotten tomatoes, the film holds a 20% rating, based on 35 reviews, with the consensus: "it boasts a few laughs, but overall, tyler perry's a madea christmas ranks among perry's least entertaining or substantive works." on metacritic, the film has a score of 28 out of 100, based on 20 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".  audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an a- grade.owen gleiberman of entertainment weekly gave the film  a grade b- but said that it felt like reruns: "tyler perry's movies haven?t gotten any worse, but they haven't gotten better either, so they now carry the added disadvantage of overfamiliarity."variety called it "an exceptionally poor piece of holiday cash-in product, rushed and ungainly even by the low standard set by perry's seven previous madea films, yet it should be every bit as profitable."the hollywood reporter wrote: "bah humbug to this latest screen outing for tyler perry's inexplicably popular character" and criticized the clunky narrative and the hackneyed dialogue.


=== accolades ===


== home media ==
a madea christmas was released on blu-ray and dvd on november 25, 2014. the dvd contains a first look at the opening of the then-upcoming animated feature madea's tough love.


== references ==


== external links ==
tyler perry's a madea christmas at imdb
tyler perry's a madea christmas at the tcm movie database