aadmi aur insaan is a 1969 hindi film produced by b. r. chopra and directed by yash chopra. the film stars dharmendra, saira banu, feroz khan, mumtaz, johnny walker,madan puri, ajit, anwar, iftekhar, achla sachdev, kamini kaushal and nazima. the film's music is by ravi with lyrics by sahir ludhiyanvi. "zindagi ittefaq hai " song is still popular .
this is the only movie in which yash chopra and dharmendra have worked together.


== plot ==
a wealthy and independent industrialist, jai kishan befriends a young man from a middle-class background by the name of munish mehra (dharmendra), assists him financially to go abroad and get necessary qualifications as an engineer, and then hires him on one of his construction projects. meena khanna (saira banu) is the daughter of a government official. munish and meena meet and fall in love with each other. jai also gets attracted towards meena. shortly after this, jai finds out that munish is in love with meena, and gets enraged. he subsequently fires munish, and ensures that he will not get hired anywhere else. after several vain attempts to obtain employment, munish gets hired by the government, and is assigned to investigate the collapse of a railway bridge. munish finds out that jai was directly responsible for this mishap as he used sub-standard materials. munish now has the tools to take revenge from jai and destroy him, and accordingly informs his employer. but when the time comes for munish to make a full report, he declines, and the government has no alternative but to prosecute him in a court of law for taking bribes and destroying his report. and the main witness appearing against him is none other than jai.


== cast ==
dharmendra	 ...	munish mehra
saira banu	 ...	meena khanna
feroz khan	 ...	jai kishan / j.k.
mumtaz	 ...	rita
johnny walker	 ...	gulam rasool
randhawa	 ...	shanker
ajit	 ...	kundanlal / sher singh
uma dutt	 ...	sher singh
anwar hussain	 ...	gupta
iftekhar	 ...	saxena
gajanan jagirdar	 ...	judge
kamini kaushal	 ...	mrs. khanna (meena's mom)
poonam sinha (komal)	 ...	renu mehra
manmohan krishna	 ...	mr. khanna (meena's father)
roopesh kumar	 ...	abdul rashid / rashu
nana palsikar	 ...	justice b.n. desai
madan puri	 ...	sabharwal
jagdish raj	 ...	balwa (drunkard)
achala sachdev	 ...	mrs. mehra (munish's mom)
surekha
ram avtar	 ...	sweets seller (uncredited)
keshav rana	 ...	rana (uncredited)
ravikant	 ...	mirza (uncredited)


== soundtrack ==
music: ravi, lyrics: sahir ludhiyanvi.


== awards ==
1970 filmfare best supporting actor award for feroz khannominated

1971filmfare best supporting actress award for mumtaz


== external links ==
aadmi aur insaan at imdb