aadupuliyattam (transl.goat and tiger game) is a 2016 indian malayalam-language horror film directed by kannan thamarakkulam and written by dinesh palleth, starring jayaram in the lead role. the major filming locations are palani and thodupuzha. film released on 20 may 2016.
the horror thriller film is dubbed in tamil as shenbaga kottai and telugu as mathangi and hindi as mera badla 2.
the film was a commercial success at the box office.


== plot ==
the film starts showing prince romantically watching chempakam bathing with her friends on a pond. suddenly war comes where the prince gets defeated. prince to escape from capture come to chempakam residing area. chempakam who loves the prince tells the prince cannot be captured by anyone as long she is there because she has some special powers and then cuts her throat. from there who ever enters chempakakotai area will be killed by a supernatural power. 
the film scene shifts to sathyajith with his wife and daughter enter their house. 
satyajith (jayaram) is a wealthy businessman who is haunted by some visions. on his psychiatrist's advice, he meets a yogi (om puri). the yogi tells him that the property, chempakakottai, which he bought 2 years ago, is the reason for his visions and that some spirits are waiting to take revenge against him by killing his family and friends. he also says that soil taken from four corners of the kottai should be brought to him. satyajith sends his friend to take the soil. although his friend who does not believe in ghosts manages to get the soil, he is brutally beaten up and put in the icu. satyajith takes the soil to the yogi who puts it with some statues and does some karmas in three bags. he tells satyajith to take the two bags to a priest and a musalyar while the third one is left with him. later, the yogi asks him to stay in the house before the next full moon, 13 days from then as the spirit gets full powers on that day. the yogi gives them a raksha to be buried in front of the house. satyajith and his friends go there. 
satyajith and his friends previously was involved in attracting pregnant ladies with advertising their babies will be skillful by birth like abhimanyu who learned tackling padmavyuham from lord sreekrishna while in subadra's womb. now after gathering lot of money they go stay in chempakakotai. there one day satyajith friends drink alcohol which malli, the daughter of mathangi, objects but drinking is continued. for this the friends are tied onto a tree showing mathangi's power. mathangi tells satyajith nobody can take away their place and goes off to their house. sathyajith shows himself getting attracted to mathangi. one day aadhishwaran comes to take away the child to make mathangi obey his wishes, but sathyajith fights and drives them away. day by day sathyajith shows good toys to malli who likes satyajith very much. satyajith tells that he is ready to marry mathangi when on one day mathangi tells not to cheat her child by showing love. then marriage happens. in the chempakakotai mathangi waits for first night with sathyajith, after sleeping malli. but aadhishwaran comes telling there was a deal for which sathyajith wants to take away the fort with aadhishwaran help in exchange for mathangi. aadhishwaran tries to sex but mathangi runs away with malli. aadhishwaran searches for mathangi but couldn't find. then satyajith comes with his friends and locks the chempakakotai doors and puts fire at mathangi house. for this sathyajith gets lot of money from minister. that night sathyajith and his friends tries to celebrate with drinks but sathyajith gets sad as he now feel he shouldn't have cheated mathangi. next day sathyajith ask aadhishwaran for mathangi, who tells she ran away. the scene shifts to inside chempakakotai where days have passed with mathangi and malli trapped inside without food and water. malli falls down and start becoming weak and immobile. now one day sathyajith comes to chempakakkotai in search for mathangi. foul smell comes from the kotai. he breaks the door lock and go inside and finds malli dead and darkened with mathangi sitting close immobile. sathyajith digs the grave, while this time aadhishwaran comes and tells he will dig the grave as he only loved mathangi but sathyajith never loved mathangi.
scene shifts now to sathyajith residential house where his wife and daughter live.  meanwhile, the ghost kills one friend of sathyajith by turning down the car with collision and explosion. 
now sathyajith and his family started live in chempakakotai. his daughter starts get possessed by malli who comes as a ghost. for this the yogi tells only her mother mathangi can calm malli to prevent being possessed. and that mathangi is still alive. sathyajith and his wife goes to aadhishwaran house for mathangi. here, a fight happen when aadhishwaran doesn't want mathangi to be taken away. aadhishwaran tells mathangi is tied because she is mad. sathyajith accuses muthu for telling lies regarding mathangi. mathangi is shown tied like a mental but tells satyajith that she acted mental and waited till this time of hope to meet satyajith to ask why he cheated her and malli. mathangi finally agrees to come when sathyajith wife tells her child is innocent for the cheating from sathyajith. now at chempakakotai upon seeing mathangi, malli tells she wants to revenge as she was cheated and died very badly. now a yaga with full swamy around start mantras. mathangi takes the plate in which bone pieces of malli is put, and puts it in fire. mathangi dies there itself. now sathyajith is safe as his child now normal with his wife. film end showing mathangi and malli spirit together ascend up to sky.


== cast ==
jayaram as sathyajith
ramya krishnan as matangi (mahishwari in hindi version)
om puri as yogendra muni
sheelu abraham as amala (sathyajith's wife)
ramesh pisharody as sunny
saju navodaya as saju
akshara kishor as aami(sathyajith and amala's daughter)
aangelina abraham as malli (mallika in hindi version)
sampath raj as aadhishwaran
siddique as psychiatrist/narrator
s. p. sreekumar as appu
pradeep kottayam as kunju narayanan (a journalist)
valsala menon as a black magician
thampy antony as father arun mouli
veena nair as jyothi (appu's wife)


== production ==
the film is directed by kannan thamarakkulam which is a "horror comedy". jayaram was selected in the leading role along with om puri and ramya krishnan in other pivotal roles. jayaram used a salt and pepper hair style in the film which was suggested by his son kalidas jayaram. sheelu abraham is playing the female lead, the role which was initially offered and rejected by jewel mary, sheila kaur, and asha sarath.the film's pooja ceremony was held in november 2015 at thodupuzha, kerala.


== music ==
the soundtrack and background score was composed by ratheesh vegha. the soundtrack comprising 4 tracks was released on 6 april 2016 by east coast audios. the release coincided with a promotional event held at the adlux international convention & exhibition centre in angamaly, kochi.

all lyrics are written by kaithapram damodaran namboothiri, mohan rajan, harinarayanan.


== release and reception ==
aadupuliyattam released on 20 may 2016 in 70 centers across kerala.


=== box office ===
the film collected around 15.42 crore (us$2.2 million) within 50days from kerala box office.
the film was commercial success.


=== post-release ===
soon after the release, it was announced that a percentage of the film's gross profit will be shared with the family of 'jisha', a dalit girl from perumbavoor who was brutally raped and killed in 2016.


== references ==


== external links ==
aadupuliyattam at imdb
aadupuliyattam official trailer on youtube