aaina (english: mirror), is a 1993 bollywood romantic drama film directed by deepak sareen, produced by yash chopra and independently produced by his wife pamela chopra. it stars juhi chawla, jackie shroff and amrita singh in lead roles with deepak tijori in a supporting role. the film was a blockbuster hit in india, and solidified juhi chawla's career as a leading lady in the 1990s. amrita singh performance in a negative role was much appreciated and is regarded as one of her career best performances. the film was remade in telugu as aayanaki iddaru (1995), in tamil as kalyana vaibhogam (1997) and in kannada as yare nee abhimani (2000).


== plot ==
roma (amrita singh) and reema mathur (juhi chawla) are the daughters of mr mathur (saeed jaffery), a wealthy businessman. roma, the older one, has always been spoiled, gets everything she desires, and is very competitive. on the other hand, reema is a beautiful and shy girl who is quite reserved and usually lets her sister take the spotlight. both grow up to be entirely different. the only similarity is that the sisters fall in love with the same man, ravi saxena (jackie shroff).
always the centre of attention, roma catches his eye first. reema is heartbroken but puts on a brave face. ravi and roma decide to get married. unfortunately, roma is ambitious to be a star in a film and gets an offer on the day of her wedding. she accepts and abandons ravi minutes before their wedding. ravi is furious and, in turn, marries reema to save the honour of her family.
at first, ravi and reema's relationship is quite uncomfortable. but, as time passes, ravi falls in love with reema. unfortunately, roma comes back home in a rage and tells them that they will never be happy because she has been betrayed. determined to get ravi back, roma is willing to do anything including ruining her sister's life. she creates a lot of trouble like pretending to commit suicide etc. in the end, reema gives in and leaves her house, so ravi furiously makes roma understand what the difference is between her and reema. roma realises her mistake and reunites ravi and reema.


== cast ==
juhi chawla as reema mathur saxena
amrita singh as roma mathur
jackie shroff as ravi saxena
deepak tijori as vinay saxena
saeed jaffrey as mr. mathur
dina pathak as grandma
maya alagh as mrs. mathur
rajesh khattar as sunil


== soundtrack ==
all the songs were composed by dilip sen and sameer sen and lyrics were penned by sameer.


== awards ==
amrita singh won a filmfare best supporting actress award for her performance.


== references ==


== external links ==
aaina at imdb