aan: men at work (translation: pride: men at work) is a 2004 indian hindi-language action thriller film directed by madhur bhandarkar featuring akshay kumar, sunil shetty, shatrughan sinha and paresh rawal in the leading roles, while jackie shroff, raveena tandon, lara dutta, om puri, rahul dev, manoj joshi and irrfan khan played supporting roles. it was released on 4 june 2004.


== plot ==
crime is at its highest peak in mumbai, with it split in three ways. gautam walia, a ruthless businessman (jackie shroff) has one-third, manik rao, the home minister (manoj joshi) has one-third and yusuf pathan, a big-time goon (irrfan khan) has a third of the territory. the trio warns raghu shetty not to interfere with their business. raghu pays no heed to their warning and ambushes walia at a horse derby. walia is alive, but pathan kills shetty's man, who carried on the hit. shetty is then jailed. the crime rate rises with more smuggling, trading and illegal activities soaring. meanwhile, the detection unit cops of the mumbai crime branch work constantly to stop this.senior inspector vikram singh (shatrughan sinha), who was a hero once upon a time in the crime department, now tends to handle the easy jobs. inspector appa kadam naik (sunil shetty) is an encounter specialist who goes after the henchmen instead of the bosses; he is married to janki (preeti jhangiani), and they have a son named rahul. head constable khaled ansari (paresh rawal) is a happy-go-lucky cop and chews paan (betel leaf) all the time. kelkar (ajinkya deo) is another cop who talks on the phone all the time. the four men's and the whole cbi's fate changes with the arrival of their new boss.
dcp hari om patnaik (akshay kumar) arrives and realizes that the other cops are not serious and that no one is following the rules and regulations. om has a girlfriend, kiran (lara dutta), whom he promises to marry. he is hesitant about his promotion as he thinks that this promotion is done deliberately to kick him out, but he learns to accept it. he witnesses the way the others treat the henchmen and orders them to be released. but during an encounter at a bar, the henchmen kill khaled, making the policemen seek revenge.
he decides to join om and appa and help him clear the city, starting with yusuf pathan's younger brother, baba "yeda" pathan (rahul dev), by killing him. after that, they arrest yusuf pathan, which puts a halt to small-time criminal activities in mumbai. simultaneously, raghu shetty replaces pathan to run the illegal businesses which pathan was handling. during the climax, appa dies in a trap set by kelkar. vikram and om track raghu shetty and a hawala trader named hirachand mehta at the flying club with the help of a tip given by roshni varma (raveena tandon), walia's keep to vikram. the police try to block the plane at the runway, but to no use. finally, hari damages the left wing and the back engine of the plane with a helicopter. the plane crashes into a hangar. shetty and his goons try to escape, but are killed. vikram kills shetty. hirachand is arrested, and kelkar's corrupt actions are caught by vikram and hari. if left alive, he will be bailed out by the lawyers, so vikram shoots him.
the arguments in the court are in the favour of walia and his men. during the break, vikram and hari threaten the corrupt judge to change his judgement. the judgement is in the acceptance of the police, and the case is closed. dcp khurrana, om and vikram walk out of the courtroom happily. hari says that mumbai is crime free. vikram then shows a list of gangsters that had to be encountered by appaa, to which hari agrees. he then meets kiran, who says that she is proud of him.


== cast ==
akshay kumar as dcp hari om patnaik
sunil shetty as inspector appa kadam naik
shatrughan sinha as senior inspector vikram singh
paresh rawal as head constable khalid ansari
jackie shroff as gautam walia, a renowned and corrupt businessman
raveena tandon as roshni varma
lara dutta as kiran
preeti jhangiani as janki naik
om puri as police commissioner khurrana
irrfan khan as yusuf pathan
ravi kishan as raghu shetty
rajpal yadav as apte
manoj joshi as home minister manik rao
rahul dev as baba "yeda" pathan
milind gunaji as ajit pradhan
ajinkya deo as kelkar
xing yu as goon of raghu shetty
vijay raaz as vaaman
manoj mishra as prisoner
vallabh vyas as hirachand
nawab shah as the shooter
aanjjan srivastav as a judge
gauahar khan - special appearance in song "nasha"


== music ==
"dil se dilbar" - kumar sanu, anuradha paudwal
"hamare baad" - shabbir kumar, udit narayan, ujwala, sarika kapoor
"jab tak rahega" - abhijeet, anuradha paudwal
"hum aapse" - sonu nigam, alka yagnik
"koi pyar na kare" - shreya ghoshal, sonu nigam
"jugnu ki payal" - zubeen garg, shaswati
"nasha nasha" - sunidhi chauhan
"koi pyar na kare" - sonu nigam


== references ==


== external links ==
aan: men at work at imdb