aap ki kasam (english: i swear by you) is a 1974 indian hindi romance film produced by j. om prakash, which also marks his directorial debut. the film stars rajesh khanna, mumtaz, sanjeev kumar, rehman, asrani and a. k. hangal. the music is by r.d. burman, who received the only filmfare nomination for the film. the film was successful and was declared as superhit at the box office, and it was also acclaimed by the critics. the songs from the film, including "jai jai shiv shankar", "zindagi ke safar mein" and 'karvate badalate rahen", became very popular.
the newspaper "the hindu", in its review of the film, quoted: "in a remarkable scene, where rajesh khanna, his anger simmering, confronts mumtaz, the director, j. om prakash, brings out the performer in both. mumtaz brings compelling expressions to her countenance as her initial disbelief at being doubted by her husband is transformed from anguish to fury in a flash. this remains the standout moment of the movie apart from the song "zindagi ke safar mein guzar jate hain jo maqaam".the film is a remake of the malayalam film vaazhve mayam (1970), directed by k. s. sethumadhavan, where the ending was different. the film was later also remade in telugu, retaining the original ending, by director dasari narayana rao as edadugula bandham, (1985) starring mohan babu and jayasudha.


== plot ==
kamal bhatnagar (rajesh khanna) is a jealous husband who begins to doubt the fidelity of his wife sunita (mumtaz), when his best friend mohan (sanjeev kumar) enters their lives. sunita is unable to convince kamal that she loves only him. he leaves her, not knowing that she is pregnant with his child. depressed and confused, kamal becomes a homeless wanderer, while sunita remarries to provide a secure home for her child. many years later, the truth dawns on him as he turns up, a broken man, at his own daughter's wedding.


== cast ==
rajesh khanna as kamal bhatnagar
mumtaz as sunita bhatnagar
sanjeev kumar as mohan
rehman as sunita's father
dina pathak as sunita's mother
jayshree t. as sunita's friend
ranjeet as suresh
a. k. hangal as kamal's father
brahm bhardwaj as kamal's lawyer
murad as kamal's employer
jr. mehmood as kalua
ruby sulochana as girl's hostel superintendent
asrani as dr. ghad-ghad singhwala
satyendra kapoor as dr. harish
sunder as dhandu ram
keshto mukherjee as kanhaiya lal


== crew ==
director - j. om prakash
producer - j. om prakash
executive producer - jagdish kumar
editor -  pratap dave
cinematographer - v. babasaheb
art director - sudhendu roy
costume designer - mani j. rabadi, padma rani
choreographer - suresh bhatt


== music ==
song "jai jai shiv shankar" was 'second' topmost song in binaca geetmala annual list 1974
song "karvaten badalte rahe" was listed at #17 on binaca geetmala annual list 1974
all lyrics are written by anand bakshi; all music is composed by rahul dev burman.


== references ==


== external links ==
aap ki kasam at imdb