aarzoo (transl. desire) is a 1999 indian hindi romance film directed by lawrence d'souza stars madhuri dixit, akshay kumar, saif ali khan, amrish puri, paresh rawal and reema lagoo. the film was primarily filmed in mumbai, but some scenes were filmed in london and edinburgh.


== plot ==
dayashankar (amrish puri) is a wealthy nri living in london with his wife parvati( reema lagoo) and daughter pooja (madhuri dixit), who is the apple of his eye. dayashankar also takes care of his deceased best friend's son amar (saif ali khan), who he regards as a surrogate son, and has always wished that he eventually marry pooja. studying in edinburgh, amar is overjoyed when he is invited to stay with dayashankar's family in london. he eagerly prepares for his meeting with pooja, with whom he has shared his childhood, and plans to ask her father for her hand in marriage as soon as possible.
however, pooja has other plans  she has fallen in love with vijay (akshay kumar), a pilot and plans to marry him. this bitterly disappoints dayashankar, as he has already tacitly promised amar that he would marry pooja. after some convincing from parvati and amar, who has decided to give up on marrying pooja, dayashankar agrees to his daughter's wishes. though heartbroken, amar puts on a brave face during vijay and pooja's engagement and subsequent marriage. 
however, tragedy strikes soon afterward as vijay is declared dead in an aviation accident. consequently, pooja becomes a widow and becomes severely depressed; to make matters worse, she finds out she is pregnant with vijay's child. her father now is able to convince her to marry amar so that the unborn child gets a nice father figure to look up to. amar willingly accepts this marriage and takes on the role of father to pooja's baby boy.  when pooja realises that amar has always loved her, she begins to reciprocate his feelings.
in a twist of fate, after a few years the police reveal that vijay is very much alive, and after his recovery he goes back to the uk to reclaim pooja. pooja is overjoyed to see him, but when vijay sees that pooja is happily married to amar, he misunderstands the situation and believes societal rumours about amar  that he had planned vijay's aviation accident so that he could marry pooja. vijay becomes so hostile towards amar that he gangs up with kailashnath (paresh rawal), an old enemy of amar's father who had killed him, and sets out for revenge by setting fire to amar's factories and kidnapping pooja's son, not knowing that the boy is his own son. even though pooja attempts to explain that she married amar in order to give her child a father figure, vijay continues to believe in the rumours about amar. vijay and pooja decide they need to spend some time apart to deal with the turn of events, and in the meantime the police reveal that vijay's accident was in fact not planned by amar, but by pooja's own father, dayashankar.
when kailashnath holds vijay and pooja's son captive, asking for a high ransom, dayashankar begins to regret his actions and is willing to pay anything to get his grandson back. vijay also begins to realize that his hostility against pooja and her family is futile, and he starts to become more forgiving to his father-in-law dayashankar and thankful to amar for taking good care of pooja and his son during his long absence.
finally, vijay, dayashankar, and amar begin to cook up a plan to retrieve vijay's son from kailashnath. when they all finally get near kailashnath and his gang with help from the police, kailashnath shoots amar multiple times, but amar uses his body as a shield to protect the child, whereupon dayashankar intervenes to shoot kailashnath  his best friend's murderer  to death. amar slowly passes away, surrounded by a sobbing pooja, a regretful vijay, their rescued son, and a saddened dayashankar. pooja and vijay reconcile and honour amar after his death.


== cast ==
madhuri dixit as pooja
akshay kumar as vijay khanna aka deva
saif ali khan as amar
amrish puri as dayashankar
paresh rawal as kailashnath
laxmikant berde
tej sapru
mukesh rishi
mohan joshi as rajpal
aruna irani as vijay's mother
reema lagoo as parvati (pooja's mother)
yunus parvez


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by anu malik and lyrics were penned by anand bakshi.


=== track listing ===


== external links ==
aarzoo at imdb
aarzoo at allmovie