aasha (transl.hope) is a 1980 indian hindi-language drama film, produced and directed by j. om prakash under the filmyug pvt. ltd. banner. it stars  jeetendra, reena roy, rameshwari  and music composed by laxmikant pyarelal. the film is recorded as a "blockbuster" at the box office. it was remade in telugu as anuraga devatha (1982), in tamil as sumangali (1983) and in bengali as mandira (1990).
over the years, the film has become a cult classic. director j. om prakash included in aasha (1980) the first screen appearance of his grandson hrithik roshan.


== plot ==
deepak (jeetendra) is a truck driver who gives a lift to a famous singer aasha (reena roy) when her vehicle breaks down. they become friends. deepak is already in love with mala (rameshwari), whom he marries. aasha wishes him well calling him "dost" (friend), even though she has fallen in love with him.
deepak has an accident, and everyone believes that he is dead. his grieving mother tells a pregnant mala to go away. mala goes home to her father, but he dies. an upset mala jumps from a bridge into the water. she is saved by members of a temple community but has her eye sight. she gives birth to a daughter and names her deepamala.
deepak is also alive. when he comes home his mother is overjoyed. she tells him of mala's suicide and he becomes depressed.
aasha re-enters deepak's life and helps him overcome his depression. they then get engaged and also get acquainted with deepamala, now a little girl, selling little god statues on the street. they are completely enchanted by her, though they don't know that she is deepak's daughter.
aasha meets mala and offers to pay for her eye operation, so she can regain her sight. she also invites her and deepamala to the wedding.
mala regains her eye sight and goes to aasha's wedding. shocked to see deepak, she leaves immediately, not wanting to disrupt aasha and deepak's life together. mala's silent admirer (girish karnad) however tells deepak that mala is alive and that deepamala is his daughter.
aasha cancels the wedding, calls deepak  "dost" (friend), and tells him to reunite with his wife and daughter. aasha goes back to stage to sing her signature song "shisha ho ya dil ho, aakhir toot jata hai," which translates into "whether it's glass or a heart, it will inevitably break."


== cast ==
jeetendra as deepak
reena roy as aasha
rameshwari as mala
girish karnad as deepak (mala's friend)
shakti kapoor as cameo appearance
hrithik roshan as (credited) boy dancing in song "jaane hum sadak ke logon se"


== soundtrack ==


== production ==
director-producer j. om prakash enlivened aasha by having his camera crew secretly shoot without the boy's knowledge as his beloved grandson  hrithik roshan, who grew up to become one of india's most acclaimed superstar actors. in 1980, he was a child aged 6, who danced spontaneously while visiting grandpa's set during a song sequence. as j. om prakash later recounted the events:
"the song was to be shot on jeetendra. hrithik was on the sets, and he liked the interlude music very much and started dancing. i had asked my cameraperson and crew to be ready. i asked hrithik if he liked the song, and he said, "yes, deda, it is lovely music." i replayed the music and he started dancing, and we shot it without his knowledge. when the music got over, the entire studio applauded excitingly. the remaining part of the music was to be shot in the same way with jeetu. after jeetu's shot was over, he came to me and said, "for god's sake don't shoot a single more shot in this film with this boy, otherwise the audience will hoot my performance!" that was a remark that came from jeetu (jeetendra, the male lead of aasha and a major hindi film star)."


== filmfare nominations ==
best film  1980
best director  j. om prakash
best actress  reena roy
best supporting actor  girish karnad
best supporting actress  rameshwari
best story  ram kalkar
best music  laxmikant pyarelal
best lyricist  anand bakshi for the song "sheesha ho ya dil ho"


== references ==


== external links ==
aasha at imdb