aata (english: game) is a 2007 telugu romantic action film starring siddharth and ileana d'cruz in the lead roles. m. s. raju produced this film while v. n. aditya directed the project. this film was released on 9 may 2007. it was a success at the box office. the film was remade in bengali as kellafate (2010). a controversy arose when the director of gudumba shankar accused the unit regarding copyright issues for copying that movie.


== plot ==
srikrishna (siddharth) is a freak young chap who lives in a village along with his father (sarath babu), who runs a theater. krishna wants to lead his life like a hero, just as in movies played in his father's theater. he meets satya (ileana) in a carnival and immediately falls for her. he helps her to escape from hooligans and takes her to a safe place. they spent some time together and satya too gets connected with him. she reveals that she is escaping from a proposed marriage with a politician's son vicky (munna). she tells a flashback that tells: vicky raped and killed her friend on new year's eve. he got released by court as an innocent, using his political influence. frustrated, satya tried to hit him with a stone. but in return, when vicky sees her, he becomes infatuated with her and wanted to marry her irrelevant of her consent.
he and his parents blackmailed satya's parents and arranged their wedding. satya narrowly escaped from a train and tried to get to her aunt's house when she meets srikrishna. she asked him to marry her and go to some safe place where vicky can't find them. but krishna took her to vicky and gained his confidence. he started his game using vicky as pawn and tells him to gain satya's confidence. they play with him and meanwhile vicky befriends krishna and starts to tell his secrets. finally one day, while inebriated, vicky reveals to krishna that he killed satya's friend and escaped punishment. krishna records that and gives it to a commissioner who was waiting for an evidence to convict vicky. finally vicky gets arrested and satya and krishna get married with their parents blessings.


== cast ==


== music ==
the music and soundtrack of the movie was composed by devi sri prasad and released by aditya music


== production ==
some critics noted that the plot closely follows the plot of the pawan kalyan's film gudumba shankar. aata did very well commercially.
the movie was dubbed into tamil as gillida, and in hindi as aaj ka great gambler, and in oriya as hero.


== references ==


== external links ==
aata at imdb