abhimanyu is a 1997 tamil crime film directed by k subash. the film features r parthiepan, ravali, raghuvaran and geetha in lead roles. the film, produced by c chiranjeevi, had musical score by deva and was released on 5 september 1997.


== plot ==
maasilamani (raghuvaran), a dreaded don, spreads terror around him: triggering riots, smuggling illicit liquor and drugs. the police are exasperated by maasilamani and send abhimanyu (r parthiepan) to cope with maasilamani. abhimanyu is an incorruptible and strict assistant commissioner of police who has been suspended seven times for challenging his superiors.
abhimanyu first reforms the corrupt constables and befriends the police officer deraviyam (chandrasekhar). in the meantime, manju (ravali) fall in love with abhimanyu. then, abhimanyu intercepts maasilamani's illicit drugs shipments. at this point, abhimanyu becomes maasilamani's worst enemy in a very short time. maasilamani cannot kill him directly for fear of having the police behind him. so he triggers a riot in a college to kill smoothly abhimanyu but abhimanyu stops the riot just in time. maasilamani's right-hand somu turns approver, maasilamani henchmen manage to kill him and deraviyam at the court. in anger, abhimanyu wants to punish maasilamani but he sees a familiar face in maasilamani's house.
abhimanyu is, in fact, an orphan. in the past, abhimanyu's father (anandaraj) was a heartless corrupt police inspector and abhimanyu's mother kausalya killed him. so abhimanyu's sister was sent to an orphanage and the pregnant kausalya in jail. abhimanyu was born in jail. the person that abhimanyu saw in maasilamani's house is actually ranjitha: his long-lost elder sister and maasilamani's wife.
what transpires later forms the crux of the story.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the film score and the soundtrack were composed by film composer deva. the soundtrack, released in 1997, features five tracks with lyrics written by vairamuthu, kalidasan, ponniyin selvan, mayil and vaasan.


== references ==