abodh (english: innocent) is a 1984 bollywood film directed by hiren nag. it marked the debut of actress madhuri dixit  and the bollywood debut of bengali actor tapas paul.


== plot ==
naive, childish and precocious, gauri lives in a small town with her parents. gauri's parents are in search for a groom for her. at a fair, she gets into a small argument with a boy called shankar, in which shankar's grandmother supports gauri. after that, shankar's grandmother sees gauri singing in the evening prayer of the shiv temple. shankar's grandmother makes the decision that gauri will be a perfect match for shankar. shortly thereafter, gauri's marriage is fixed. she is at first quite happy not knowing who her groom is for the huge present she is receiving. gauri is told that her marriage has been arranged. at first, gauri is thrilled, then changes her mind when she finds out that her groom is shankar, but finally reconciles herself to the marriage.
after she relocates to shankar's residence, she spends much of her time playing with shankar's little brother. her husband starts to realize that gauri has not matured yet. he is unable to get intimate with her. gauri soon becomes bored. when, one day, shankar tries to force gauri to be intimate with him, the gap between gauri and shankar deepens.
after gauri's sister, ratna, is married and returns home, gauri visits her. ratna explains to gauri the meaning of the sacred relationship between a husband and wife. gauri, realizing the importance of marriage and intimacy, asks her sister-in-law to arrange her vehicle to her in-laws' house. however, gauri arrives to her in-laws' house at the same time that shankar departs for his college study, relocating to study in another town after feeling guilt for his forcing gauri to be intimate with him.
for several months, the family does not get any news about him. in the meantime, ratna visits gauri in her in-laws' house, where she comes to know the difference between gauri and her husband. shankar's father, gajanan singh, visits the hostel where his son is supposed to be staying; however, gajanan finds that shankar left the hostel a day before without saying when he would return. for three months, shankar goes missing.
in the end, shankar meets gauri's sister ratna by chance at a fair. after talking to ratna, shankar realises that gauri has matured and loves him. ratna also explains to shankar that gauri is living in deprivation because of his absence. he goes running back to meet gauri. they both reconcile and live happily ever after.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
"ghani ghani amariya" - hemlata
"ghani ghani amraiyo (part-2)" - hemlata
"tujhe dekhne ko tarasti hai aankhe yeh dil" - suresh wadkar
"mandir ki murti si baithi" - hemlata, suresh wadkar
"ghir aaye megh parbat pe bijuriya chamke" - hemlata
"saamb sada shiv, saamb sada shiv" - k. j. yesudas
"chandra baal shobitam" - hemlata


== references ==


== external links ==
abodh at imdb