achchamundu! achchamundu! (english: there is fear! there is fear!) is a 2009 indian-american tamil language social thriller directed by arun vaidyanathan, starring prasanna, sneha and emmy awardwinning american film actor john shea. it is the first film in indian cinema to be shot with the red one camera system. the film was released on 17 july 2009 worldwide, receiving highly positive reviews. after its release, it was believed prasanna and sneha fell in love during the shooting because they were seen together during functions after its release. although it was a rumor, they were married on 11 may 2012 in chennai.


== plot ==
senthil kumar (prasanna) and malini (sneha) are a happily married couple in new jersey, living life like any other born-in-india, arrived-in-the-us couple do. he submerges himself in the office and eats sambhar rice at home and she never misses a bhajan at the temple and shops at indian stores. they have a daughter rithika (akshaya dinesh), 10 years old, the apple of their eyes (their car's license plate carries the name of their daughter).
they have just settled down in a new, spacious home about which malini, understandably, has fears. the couple squabble amicably about everything from her perpetual laundry and cooking; while senthil argues with friends about the significance of viboothi (holy ash, usually applied on forehead) and takes his family on weekend trips and birthday parties. it is a normal, happy life in the us until robertson (john shea) arrives, to paint the basement. now, things are never the same at home again.
robertson's unusually kind behaviour towards children sets off warning bells in your head especially when he is shown to be a pedophile who exercises like mad within the confines of his home, always moving on towards his next target. how the couple save their child forms the rest of the story.


== cast ==
prasanna as senthil kumar
sneha as malini kumar
john shea as theodore robertson
akshaya dinesh as rithika
tara shankar as meena
mohan raman as party guest
mark stolzenberg as clown


== production ==


=== title ===
the film's title is the inverse of the phrase "achamillai achamillai" coined by poet subramania bharati, and later used as the title of a 1984 film directed by k. balachander.


=== filming ===
for the first time in indian cinema, red one camera was used for filming. the film was shot in new jersey and new york during early 2008. color correction and sound mixing were done in los angeles.
the film was premiered in new jersey's garden state film festival, and shared 'best homegrown feature film' award with dorothy lyman's split ends.
the film was selected for the shanghai international film festival in international panorama category. the film's audio and trailer were launched by academy award winner resul pookutty. the movie was released on 17 july 2009 in tamil nadu and select markets in the united states.


== reception ==
shanghai international film festivalthe film was officially selected for screening at the 12th shanghai international film festival, where academy award-winner danny boyle headed the jury. the film was selected under the international panorama category.
the film had a successful reception and the audience shared their appreciation with director arun vaidyanathan in a q & a session.
united statesthe film received the best homegrown feature film award at the garden state film festival, in asbury park, new jersey. the film also won critical acclaim at new york city on its official release.
digital cinema film festival, japanthe film was selected for the digital cinema film festival in japan and was well received.
cairo international film festivalachchamundu achchamundu was selected for screening at the 33rd cairo international film festival.

goa film festivalit was selected for screening in the goa film festival on 23 november 2009, along with the only tamil film pasanga.

chennai international film festivalaa was selected for screening in the chennai international film festival along with ayan, thiru thiru thuru thuru and pokkisham. it won best feature film award. pasanga won the second best feature film award.

awards won in tamil naduthe director of the movie arun vaidhyanadhan received a media guild award for creating public awareness of child sex abuse.
actress sneha won the best actress award at the global awards function that was organized by united artistes of india and alandur fine arts and edison award for best actress.
sneha was nominated for 57th filmfare awards south under filmfare best actress award category held on 7 august 2010, in chennai.rated as top 100 movies must watch in the past decade - behindwoods
musickarthik raja's music for the film was well received.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by karthik raja.


== reviews ==
rediff wrote "for the guts in coming up with a unique, important theme that needs to be addressed sensitively, this movie works. a must-watch". behindwoods wrote "although the theme of child abuse is a serious issue and has the potency to take on a different shade with even the slightest skew, arun vaidhyanathan has done a tightrope walking commendably with absolutely no shades of vulgarity or impropriety. kudos for tackling such a sensitive subject with a lot of sensibility and acumen!". times of india wrote "the average indian may shy away from paedophilia, but director vaidyanathan makes a compelling case to watch this film. subtlety is the byword here rather than gory, knife-edge moments. the approach makes a deeper impression than a dramatic one could have."


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
director's blog
achchamundu! achchamundu! at imdb
cairo international film festival screening
goa film fest screening
chennai international film festival.
winning best feature film at chennai international film festival