achcham yenbadhu madamaiyada (transl.fear is foolishness) is a 2016 indian tamil-language romantic action thriller film written and directed by gautham menon. the film stars silambarasan and manjima mohan in lead roles. while baba sehgal
plays the role of a corrupt cop. the film was initially titled as sattendru maarathu vaanillai but was changed. the film tells the story of a youngster who embarks on a road trip with his lady-love as he meets with an accident which causes things to get out of control.
principal photography commenced in november 2013, however, in june 2014, filming schedules were postponed until menon completed his other project yennai arindhaal (2015) with ajith kumar. filming recommenced on 21 february 2015, majority of shooting was done in chennai, india. the film features film score and soundtrack album composed by a. r. rahman, with lyrics by thamarai. it was simultaneously made in telugu as sahasam swasaga sagipo with naga chaitanya and manjima in lead roles.


== plot ==
the movie opens up with the protagonist (silambarasan) in a small brawl with a mob.
the protagonist, whose name is not mentioned, is revealed to be a care free mba student and bike enthusiast, accompanied by his close friends mahesh (sathish krishnan), shyam (r. shyam), srikanth (vicky vijai) and auto selvam (r. s. karthik). he has two sisters. he has two love stories that revolved around him in the past, one is sukanya and another is mallika and now he considers his new thunderbird bike as his first love ever. however, he meets and falls in love with, leela (manjima mohan), a friend of his sister maythrie (anjali rao) who stays in his house to complete her studies. he plans a long road trip in his bike to kanyakumari along with his friend mahesh but he ditches his friend in the last minute and is accompanied by leela instead.
they go to kanyakumari via salem, palakkad and trivandrum, he also humorously finds out leela's gluttony over food. on the trip they go to a village and stay for a night where they are taken care by a kind-hearted villager (madurai mohan). the next day they reach kanyakumari and see the sunrise. finally, leela falls for him. after the trip he agrees to drop her home in kolhapur. on their way to maharastra, they meet with a terrible accident. protagonist injures his shoulder and proposes to her before fainting as if he was about to die. the next day he finds himself in hospital. he feels something wrong after phoning her. the same day, leela's parents are attacked by some unknown assailants. the protagonist and his friend mahesh visit the hospital that she is in and comes to know that leela was the target, then decides to save them. however, things take a turn for the worse as they encounter a corrupt cop kamath (baba sehgal) who with a help of a gangster hiren (daniel balaji) kills raman and his wife. mahesh is sadly killed in this mess. the hero gets saddened by this and vows revenge on kamath at any cost, and goes into hiding. kamath tries to trace the hero out even in his friend's funeral. kamath finally reaches his house where another friend of the hero poses as the owner of the bike, with fake proof. kamath, being deceived returns home.
two years later, kamath is preparing to receive his new superior police officer. finally the heros name is revealed to be 'rajinikanth muralitharan'. the new officer is none other than the protagonist himself;he is now the new dcp of kohlapur, who went into an exile, studied upsc and chose ips despite being eligible for ias to fulfill his vengeance. he also reveals the reason behind hiding his name so far; his mother, being a big fan of actor rajinikanth, without any hesitations, named him so as soon as he was born. whenever anyone asks his name, and when he tells his name, people would look at him for an extra few seconds, which is why he seldom states his name to others.
rajini then reveals that he has unravelled what happened two years ago to kamath that leela's actual father is a politician and has planned to kill leela as she was his illegitimate heir and thus a danger to his ambitions. kamath executed his plan. rajini had found out leela's actual mother anamika to know about this incident. after his probation, rajini has devised a plan to eliminate everyone involved. the politician is arrested and brought into the station. kamath, being defeated, tries to kill rajini, but accidentally shoots the politician. finally, rajini assassinates kamath in terms of self defense, avenging his friend's death. he gets a vacation based on trauma and returns home. he picks up leela from her safe house and then goes on a trip to kanyakumari again to propose to leela for marriage.


== cast ==


== production ==


=== development ===
after the success of vinnaithaandi varuvaayaa, gautham menon narrated the script to vijay along with yohan adhayam ondru script as the actor felt it wouldnt suit his image and for the audience.
gautham menon announced in october 2013 that he would produce and direct a film featuring silambarasan in the lead role after the following success of vinnaithaandi varuvaayaa. in an interview with the bangalore mirror, menon stated that the film was originally titled sattendru maarathu vaanilai and described the film as one which starts as a "love story" and then enters a "violent / action space". menon outlined the storyline of the film, stating, "it is the story of a happy-go-lucky guy (played by silambarasan) who is looking to do normal things in life but then, a situation is thrown at him and it changes everything", adding that the story is inspired by the scene in the film the godfather where a bruised michael corleone plots revenge against the corrupt policeman mccluskey. menon had previously portrayed cops as heroes but in this film, he revealed that the cop was the antagonist. when he was writing the second half of the film, he ensured not to watch films in the other genre. in december 2013, a. r. rahman was officially confirmed to compose the songs, while dan macarthur was confirmed as the film's cinematographer. baba sehgal was chosen to portray a negative role as a cop.


=== filming ===
while the team was still in the process of casting a female lead opposite silambarasan, principal photography began in mid-november 2013 with a ten-day schedule in adyar, chennai, with scenes featuring silambarasan and sathish krishnan were shot. later, filming continued for ten days with pallavi subhash as the female lead. further, the shooting progressed during the nights, in and around kalakshetra and thiruvanmiyur. a second schedule began in early december 2013 featuring scenes with the lead cast in urban chennai. the film was shot for thirty days and was put on hold until menon completed filming yennai arindhaal (2015).in 2015, pallavi subhash could not allot bulk dates to the film and was replaced by manjima mohan. she was cast after actor vineeth srinivasan made menon watch the trailer of oru vadakkan selfie and then manjima was auditioned and selected for the role. filming began from 21 february 2015, re-shooting all previous scenes with manjima mohan. by september 2015, four songs were filmed and the team was left with 20 days of work. by november 2015, ninety percent of the filming was completed. the next schedule comprised 30 allotted days. on 17 february 2016, the climax portions were being filmed in adyar, chennai. however, a stunt made silambarasan suffer facial injuries, postponing the filming schedules.


== music ==

a. r. rahman's inclusion in the project was confirmed by december 2013, marking his second collaboration with silambarasan and gautham menon after their critically acclaimed  vinnaithaandi varuvaayaa soundtrack. as per the urgency of shooting, a single track with lyrics penned by madhan karky was recorded within three hours by the composer at his studio in los angeles. recording of the songs recommenced from february 2015. by september 2015, recording of all the five tracks by a. r. rahman was completed. for the sixth track, rahman was yet to see the film and score it, which was later on added as the theme music. the soundtrack album has five songs, all placed in the first half of the film.the first single "thalli pogathey" was released on 23 january 2016, and became popular among listeners, as the lyric video of the song crossed 20 million views. the second single "rasaali" was released on 2 june 2016, followed by the third single track "showkali" on 10 august. the full album was exclusively launched in itunes on 9 september 2016. a month later, the album was released digitally on 7 october 2016, and a physical release on 10 october 2016.
the album received highly positive reviews from critics and audiences. sharanya cr from the times of india rated 4 out of 5, stating that "this one's not just for rahmaniacs, but for all the music lovers, too" behindwoods rated the album 3.5 out of 5, stating that "achcham yenbadhu madamaiyada is an apt album from the creative combination of ar rahman - gautham menon. this duo never disappoints!" sify rated the album 4 out of 5, viewing that "acham yenbathu madamaiyada has ar rahman in scintillating form with 5 masterpiece songs. gvms success ratio with his music composers is intact and the album is bound to be renowned for the quality of lyrics it has produced. this album works instantly & one doesnt need the excuse rahman songs are slow burners here. it is so refreshing to see a rahman album being uncomplicated and work in the first instance!"


== release ==
the film was initially titled sattendru maaruthu vaanilai in december 2013. the title refers to lyrics of the song "nenjukkul peidhidum", from menon's 2008 film vaaranam aayiram. however, the title could not be retained as the producers k. ethiraj and dr. saravanan completed a different film with the same title which was censored and tax exempted. a fifty-second teaser of menon's film that was released on 3 february 2014. however, in february 2015, the title was revealed as achcham yenbadhu madamaiyada.the teaser was released on 29 august 2015. the first trailer was released on 31 december 2015. the film was released on 11 november 2016.


== home media ==
the satellite rights of the film were secured by sun tv.


== box office ==
achcham yenbadhu madamaiyada received positive reviews. it earned  3.65 crore on the first day. in the next two days, the movie added a close to  7 crore to take its first-weekend tally to  10.10 crore. it has to be noted that the major chunk of the business have come from chennai and chengalpet regions. aym collected  25.60 crore total after the first week of release.


== accolades ==
64th filmfare awards south 2017best music director a. r. rahman

best lyricist thamarai (for "thalli pogathey")

best female debut manjima mohan

iifa utsavambest music director award (tamil) a. r. rahman

6th south indian international movie awardsbest music director award (tamil) a. r. rahman

kollywood cinema awardsbest music director award (tamil) a. r. rahman

edison awardsbest actor (2016) (tamil) t.r. silambarasan


== legacy ==
the song "thalli pogathey" was parodied by rajendran and kovai sarala in anbanavan asaradhavan adangadhavan (2017) also starring silambarasan. in the film idhu namma aalu starring silambarasan featured the song "thalli pogathey" as the ringtone of the phone for simbu's character. the line "yeno vaanilai maaruthey" from the song "thalli pogathey" inspired a short film of same name. the song "thalli pogathey" inspired a film of the same name. the film putham pudhu kaalai has a segment story called 'avalum naanum' directed by gautham menon, which is after the song avalum naanum.


== references ==


== external links ==
achcham yenbadhu madamaiyada at imdb