adam joan is a 2017 indian malayalam-language thriller film written and directed by jinu v. abraham, produced by jairaj motion pictures and b cinemas, distributed by renji panicker entertainment. the film stars prithviraj sukumaran, mishti, bhavana, narain, and rahul madhav. it was shot in scotland and kerala. adam joan was released in india on 1 september 2017 and was a big commercial success.


== plot ==
adam john pothen (pronounced "joan") is a rich planter who has a passion for farming. one day he meets amy, a jewish girl who sings in a choir, and they eventually fall in love and get married. adam's brother alan (unni), his wife swetha, and his mother are settled in scotland. adam and amy visit them, where amy conceives and is forced to stay there. while adam returns to kerala on plantation business, amy dies of childbirth complications. adam is overwhelmed and leaves his newborn daughter ila with his brother and wife, who are childless. adam believes that the pregnancy was the cause of his wife's death and never visits her thereafter.
seven years later, a guilt-ridden adam returns to scotland when his mother is killed and ila is kidnapped by unknown people. adam starts an investigation, aided by his best friend cyriac. after receiving information about children being kidnapped from edinburgh, the duo learn of satan worshipers, who sacrifice young jewish girls or christian missionaries to satan on days such as good friday and easter, when satan is considered to be weak. they suspect the satan worshipers of kidnapping ila as she is half-jewish from her maternal side. cyriac notes that daisy, swetha's friend, was suspiciously messaging someone the day ila was kidnapped, and she hails from a family in kerala which secretly worships dark forces called karuthachan ootu, and this might have something to do with ila's kidnapping. adam and cyriac kidnap daisy and interrogate her; she reveals being part of a satanic cult spread across the scottish mainland. she also reveals having taken swetha to their church where the latter prayed to have her own child and was declared pregnant after five months. the cult's high priest. edward williams, who is daisy's and swetha's professor at work too, had demanded that swetha either has to dedicate her awaited baby to satan, or surrender ila for a satanic ritual, which swetha declined. however, the cult's real target was ila, whose identity was given by daisy to edward, and who told them where to find ila. swetha too knew it was them who kidnapped ila, believing that ila will be "returned" after the ritual, and deeply apologizes to adam.
adam and cyriac search edward's house for more clues, finding a photograph with 12 satanic priests. adam then abducts edward and tortures him to no avail. adam takes edward back to his home, clears all evidence of his presence, and kills edward by throwing him off the stairs after force-feeding him with alcohol.
adam, still on track of ila, goes to edward's grave after his funeral, where he finds the other priests performing rituals on the grave. adam learns of nathan, a sri lankan tamilian satanic priest, one of the 12 priests in the photo whom he had actually seen once with ila but could not catch. he follows nathan, kidnaps his daughter, and asks him to tell where ila is. nathan reveals that ila is going to be sacrificed within two days in a ceremony on good friday, which will be attended by all the satanic priests, including himself.
adam, who had earlier arranged cyriac for safely returning nathan's daughter unconditionally, is taken to the ceremonial venue by nathan, who reminds him that the new high priest, dr. steve, is a ruthless and brilliant man who will sense any danger. adam is introduced to steve as george augustine, a satanic priest from india. as prayers for ila's sacrifice starts, steve blows adam's cover but is disrupted by nathan, who does not know that his daughter is safe, telling steve that the daughter's life is in adam's hands. steve tries to contact her, but cyriac warns steve on the phone that adam and ila should better return unharmed or else he will kill nathan's daughter. adam falls unconscious after being hit in the head, and an angry nathan charges towards steve, not willing to wait anymore for the ritual to begin, but is almost killed by the other priests. adam wakes up to save his daughter and then kills all the priests. he is stabbed by steve, but adam overpowers and kills him. nathan succumbs to his injuries. adam rescues his daughter and leaves but succumbs to his own injuries on route.
the film ends at the cemetery at graves of adam, amy, and the mother. cyriac asks ila who adam was, to which she responds that he was her father's brother. swetha and unni decide to tell ila the real facts when she is old enough, and the credits begin to roll with cyriac saying that ila will come with better flowers when she learns the truth about her parents.


== cast ==


== production ==
adam joan marks the directorial debut of jinu v. abraham. prithviraj sukumaran plays the lead character of adam john pothen, a rich planter.  bollywood actress mishti is making her debut into the malayalam film industry through this film, while narain plays the role of adam's friend named syriac. the film will have two female protagonists, bhavana plays one of them. predominantly filmed in scotland, the film also has portions shot at kochi, kottayam, mundakkayam, and thumpamon.


== music ==
gopi sunder composed the film score. the songs were composed by deepak dev with lyrics penned santhosh varma, b. k. harinarayanan, gilu joseph, and sri. c. p. chandy. 

track listing"arikil ini njaan varaam" - prithviraj sukumaran
"eden thottam" - karthika
"ee kaattu" - karthik, chorus


== release ==
adam joan was one of the onam releases of 2017. it initially released on 1 september 2017 in the usa and a week later in kerala and gcc.


== box office ==
the film grossed 1.10 crore in the opening day at the kerala box office. it collected 17.5 crore from kerala box office.


== references ==


== external links ==
adam joan at imdb