adhurs (transl. marvelous) is a 2010 indian telugu-language action comedy film directed by v. v. vinayak, written by kona venkat, and produced by vallabhaneni vamshi mohan. the film stars n. t. rama rao jr in a double role alongside nayantara and sheela. mahesh manjrekar, ashish vidyarthi, brahmanandam, sayaji shinde, tanikella bharani, and nassar play supporting roles with the music is composed by devi sri prasad with cinematography by chota k. naidu and editing by gowtham raju. this film is considered as a cult classic in telugu cinema.


== plot ==
the story is about two identical twin brothers who get separated at birth. they were separated by an old woman (vatsala rajagopal) whose daughter-in-law gave birth to a dead child for the third time. narasimha (ntr jr.) gets raised by a single mother (vinaya prasad), and he becomes an undercover agent to a top cop named naik (sayaji shinde) in order to be a cop himself. chari (also ntr jr.) is brought up by a family of traditional brahmin priests. he has a priest guru, bhattacharya aka bhattu (brahmanandam), who is in love with chandrakala aka chandu (nayanthara), one of his common customers. she, however, falls for chari after he saves her from eve-teasers (the one who saved her was actually narasimha). narasimha also has a girlfriend named nandhu (sheela), who is naik's daughter. dhanraj (ashish vidyarthi) and baba (mahesh manjrekar) are in search of the family of a top army scientist (nassar) who is narasimha's father. as they find him, they force him to invent a target-killing device by kidnapping narasimha, who is cheated by naik for loving his daughter. narasimha escapes from there, because of which two men go to chari's house on his engagement day and make a deal that if chari acts as narasimha, they would give him 30 lakhs. what happens next forms the rest of the story.


== cast ==


== reception ==
rediff gave four stars and said, "brahmanandam is hilarious. performance-wise, ntr jr takes the cake. he is simply marvellous as chari, the brahmin spouting loud dialogues while his narasimha is tough yet more sober. ntr presents the contrasts well. all in all, adhurs is ntr's show all the way!" sify gave a verdict as "mass entertainer" and noted, "ntr brings total justice to his dual role as chari and narasimha. his characterisation as a brahmin youth is simply superb and hilarious, but at the same time raking up a controversy with a group of the brahmins community approaching the state governor mr. narasimhan to ban the film. on the other hand, ntr's role as narasimha as the rugged guy would work well with the mass audience. nayanthara and sheela provide the glam quotient while brahmanandam is hilarious as bhattu, receiving a big footage which runs into nearly 40 minutes in the film." the hindu gave a mixed review stating, ashish vidyarthi "ntr in two roles is pretty easy with the diction. his dances are amazing and accord the 'mass kick' in the title song that comes before the climax. the humour component is adequately handled by brahmanandam who hogs the limelight as a hindu priest."


== music ==
the audio released on 3 december 2009. adhurs soundtrack was composed by devi sri prasad whilst lyrics were penned by chandrabose and ramajogayya sastry.


=== track list ===


== references ==


== external links ==
adhurs at imdb