adi kapyare kootamani is a 2015 indian malayalam comedy horror film co-written and directed by john varghese and starring dhyan sreenivasan, namitha pramod, vineeth mohan, aju varghese, neeraj madhav, mukesh and bijukuttan. the film was jointly produced by sandra thomas and vijay babu under the banner of friday film house and carnival motion pictures. shaan rahman has composed the soundtrack and background score for the film. the film was released theatrically on 25 december 2015.


== plot ==
the movie starts with the introduction of father alfred kattuvilayil (mukesh) who considers himself to be a very strict warden of a college boys hostel. his assistant shaanthappan (bijukuttan) always tries to show him the mischief of the students but always fails. adhishta lakshmi (namitha pramod) fights with her father (john vijay) over her boyfriend and on the next day meets bhanuprasad (dhyan sreenivasan) in the canteen of his college. bhanu has lost his gold chain by lending it for his friend harris (bhagath manuel). as he wanted money, lakshmi offers the amount of rupees 20,000 for taking her to his hostel for some unknown reason on that night.
that night bhanu smuggles lakshmi into the hostel, but by the time he tries to get her out, the way out was blocked. that night both stay in bhanu's room. not fully trusting bhanu, lakshmi ties bhanu to a table and sets alarm on his phone for 3 am. but both sleep off as it is like a lullaby song and wake up only by eight, when bhanu's friend koshy koshy (vineeth mohan) and bruno (aju varghese) knocks his door. bhanu skips college and tries to get her out. but the escape route was blocked by father and shanthappan. he tries to get her out through the main entrance but to his horror, college was closed for strike as her father had beaten an auto rickshaw driver because he had dropped her in front of the hostel thinking that she (adishta lakshmi) escaped with his help. so the students came back to the hostel.
both stays in bhanu's room for the whole day planning to escape from the terrace that night. when bhanu goes to the terrace to check, he sees a number of students including his friends bruno, koshy (vineeth mohan) and remo (neeraj madhav) boozing. they force him to drink and he forgets about lakshmi locked in his room. when shanthappan goes near bhanu's room after sometime, he hears lakshmi speaking in her sleep in tamil. he thinks that it is a ghost and get the key from bhanu's pocket and opens the door. lakshmi kicks him and run out of the room, and shanthappan is knocked out. next day bhanu wake up and father is persuaded by shanthappan to check bhanu's room for the ghost. bhanu opens the room reluctantly and is surprised not to see lakshmi. he then finds out that his friends found out about lakshmi and they together plan to get her out. lakshmi then tells them the reason why she came into the hostel. she had a lover premraj (roshan mathew) who was a casanova, who stayed in the hostel, and after he broke up with her she wanted to take revenge. so she went to his room and slapped him. friends while planning to get her out, is irritated by the behavior of remo as he constantly tries to flirt with lakshmi.
that day night when they try to get her out from the terrace, father and shanthappan see her in a white dress and they both believe that there is a ghost. then, bhanu makes a new plan: to make everyone believe that there is actually a ghost and he will summon her with ouija board in the presence of father. when the father performs some magical rituals, the ghost (lakshmi) will leave and that way she can get out of the hostel. they plan and does certain things so that the other inmates will believe that there is a ghost. but in reality, there was an actual ghost in the hostel who came when bhanu used the ouija board. but lakshmi successfully gets out of the hostel as per the original plan, even though some super natural events do occur. the ghost is shown still wandering through the hostel.
in the credits, lakshmi is in her house and bhanu visits her with her bag which she had forgotten in his room. she asks him if he had just come to give the bag or to say something else. actually, bhanu wanted to say that he loves her but lakshmi understands it. she asks him to leave but hears her father's voice and asks him to wait till three in the morning. bhanu now realizes that he is trapped in her house just like how she was trapped in the hostel. at the end the ghost does a jump scare.


== cast ==
dhyan sreenivasan as bhanu prasad
namitha pramod as adhishta lakshmi, bhanu's love interest
mukesh as father alfred kattuvillayil
vineeth mohan as koshi
aju varghese as bruno
neeraj madhav as remo
bijukuttan as shaanthappan
john vijay as gowndar, adhista lakshmi's father
sabumon abdusamad as veluchaami
devi ajith as adhishta lakshmi's mother
roshan mathew as premraj
valsala menon as ammachi / neighbor in deathbed
krishnan as auto driver
balaji sarma as electrician
disney james as ammachi's son
anjali aneesh upasana as ammachi's daughter in-law
john varghese as junior student
thomas pattathanam as new admission boy's father
bhagath manuel as harris (cameo)
pradeep kottayam as bhanu prasad's relative (cameo)


== production ==
filming commenced on 7 september at university hostel campus in thiruvananthapuram. the title of the film adi kapyare kootamani was revealed on 8 september 2015, production controller of adi kapyare kootamani is handled by shibu g suseelan.


== music ==
the music was composed by shaan rahman.


== reception ==
the film collected 2.24 crore (us$310,000) in 3 days of release, and subsequently grossed 4.6 crore (us$640,000) in a week's time.abhilash s nair and john varghese were nominated for the best script of a comedy film category at 2nd asianet comedy awards 2016 


== sequel ==
in december 2015, producer vijay babu confirmed that there would be a sequel to the film, titled adi kapyare kootamani 2. it would be directed by john varghese.


== remake ==
the film is being remade in tamil language starring ashok selvan and priya bhavani shankar in lead roles.


== references ==


== external links ==
adi kapyare kootamani at imdb