aflatoon (transl.'maverick') is an indian hindi romance action, crime, comedy, film directed by guddu dhanoa. the film stars urmila matondkar, anupam kher and akshay kumar play dual roles in both the opposite characters where one plays a positive role and another plays a negative role and also after jai kishen akshay kumar appeared second time in dual role. it was a first movie where akshay kumar got chance to play in negative role.it was released on 19 december 1997. the music rights are owned by t-series. before urmila matondkar her role was offered to mamta kulkarni but she neglected due to some reason. the film was "average"  at the box office.


== synposis ==
raja a small thief falls in love with rich beautiful girl named pooja,raja thinks to tell their love story to pooja's father vidyaprakash. but raja's lookalike rocky wins vidyaprakash by blackmailing him who is a dangour's killer.will raja save their family from rocky?


== box office reviews ==
movie's budget was 4,50,00,000 rupees it was realised in 19 december 1997 at 205 screens, first day it collected 57,00,000 rupees and in first week it collected 1,56,00,000 rupees and total net gross collection was 5,47,00,000 rupees and film proved "average"  at box office.


== plot ==
raja (akshay kumar), a good-for-nothing loafer trying to get rich quick, impersonates parimal chaturvedi, a college professor and enters into a college of beautiful rich women. he falls for rich girl pooja (urmila matondkar), and manages to win her heart. trouble comes when pooja's father prakash (anupam kher) mistakes raja for rocky (also akshay kumar), a ruthless and merciless criminal who blackmails people for money or threatens to kill them, who is a lookalike of raja. prakash, who is on rocky's payroll, asks raja for help, so raja impersonates rocky to get his secrets and prakash's money. but tables are turned when rocky finds out about raja's game. raja wakes up and finds himself kidnapped in rocky's mansion. he then realizes he has been drugged for the past seven days, and in these seven days, rocky has posed as raja and is set to marry pooja. raja is framed and arrested under the name of rocky. raja manages to escape and crashes the wedding where he tells the truth and rocky escapes. raja follows him to a multi-story building where the two fight brutally. rocky gains the advantage and knocks out raja, but he recovers to push rocky off the building, who falls to his death. at the end raja and pooja gets married.


== cast ==
akshay kumar as rocky / raja a.k.a parimal chaturvedi (double role)
urmila matondkar as pooja
shazia malik as sonia
farida jalal as raja's mother
harish patel as the police commissioner
anupam kher as vidyaprakash (pooja's father)
tiku talsania as a police inspector
remo d'souza as raja's friend
subbiraj as college principal
sonia sahni as college professor


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack has music by dilip sen-sameer sen. all the songs were extremely popular but the album was considered disappointing since it was his released right after dil to pagal hai.
the film's release delayed several months due to expletive contents in one of the songs. the film's producer, lyricist and super cassettes got notices from the supreme court asking for the removal of the contents, which the court referred to as "irrelevant use of vulgar, indecent, lewd and coarse language in films, especially in the present film where the expletive has been hurled at a policeman, only serves the purpose of corrupting the public morals."


== references ==


== external links ==
aflatoon at imdb
aflatoon at allmovie