afsar is a 2018 indian punjabi film directed by gulshan singh starring tarsem jassar, nimrat khaira, gurpreet ghuggi and karamjit anmol in lead roles. the film is based on the concept that whether kanungo is higher post than patwari but higher respect is given to the patwari rather than kanungo. the film is co-produced by nadar films and vehli janta films is the debut fol for director gulshan singh and debut in lead role for nimrat khaira.the film was theatrically released on 5 october 2018. the romantic comedy received good reviews from public whereas mixed from critics. commercially, the film opened well and earned 5.72 crore in its opening weekend worldwide.


== synopsis ==
jaspal singh (tarsem jassar), an honest person is appointed as a kanungo (revenue inspector under whom five patwaris or agricultural land clerks work). therefore, kashmiro (gurpreet kaur bhangu) a well wisher and senior lady from his village wants him to marry her niece harman (nimrat khaira) who is a teacher in a government school and wants to marry someone in a government job.
bharpur singh (karamjit anmol) who is a corrupt patwari (agricultural land clerk) from harman's village and eyes her. he lies and instigates harman's drunkard and illiterate father when he approached him for his land, that patwari post is higher and richer than that of kanungo and therefore he should get her married to him. so when jaspal and his family approaches harman's family for her hand, jaspal's father refuses them even though everyone including harman likes jaspal. as jaspal is leaving, harman advises him to work hard and any how get a post of patwari so that her father accepts him. to which jaspal replies that hard work leads to promotion and not demotion and how can he become a junior official when he is a senior official?
and look at fate, when jaspal is driving his car, another jaspal singh (ravinder mand) who has recently got the post of patwari on grounds of his father's death, asks him for lift as his scooter gets broken down. on their way, patwari jaspal tells kanungo jaspal that he doesn't like this government job and prefers lying idle and getting drunk provided he gets some easy money. looking at this great opportunity, kanungo jaspal gives money to patwari jaspal and tells him to go away some where and that he will take his place as the new patwari as both their names are same and that no one knows them at all in that village.
now, kanungo jaspal makes fake id card and with the document from patwari jaspal and reports to harman's village as the new patwari after getting patwari bharpur singh transferred through his best friend's uncle who is a politician. what happens thereafter is what the movie is all about.


== cast ==
tarsem jassar as jaspal singh
nimrat khaira as harman
gurpreet ghuggi as mastar joga singh
karamjit anmol as bharpur singh patwari
pukhraj bhalla  as jaspal's friend
nirmal rishi
parkash gadhu as shopkeeper
rana jung bahadur as jaila
vijay tandon as shopkeeper
gurnam bhullar as guest appearance
himanshi khurana as guest appearance


== soundtrack ==
soundtrack of afsar is composed by jaidev kumar, preet hundal and r guru whereas background score is composed by gurcharan singh. afsar features the vocals from tarsem jassar, nimrat khaira, arjan dhillon and ranjit bawa whereas lyrics were written by tarsem jassar, arjan dhillon, harmanjeet and gurbinder mann. music rights of the film were sold to white hill studios.


=== track list ===


== reception ==
afsar had grossed 2.17 crore in canada and 39.65 lacs in united states.


== references ==


== external links ==
afsar at imdb