aggie appleby, maker of men is a 1933 american pre-code comedy film directed by mark sandrich and written by humphrey pearson and edward kaufman. the film stars charles farrell, wynne gibson, william gargan, zasu pitts, betty furness and blanche friderici. the film was released on november 3, 1933, by rko pictures.


== plot ==
agnes appleby (wynne gibson), waitress at nick's restaurant, gets into a mass fight and escapes with friend red branaham (william gargan). the fight was about her honor. they live together, but the money isn't coming in, as it should. red branaham is caught by the police and put into jail. her landlady, mrs. spence (jane darwell), sets her on the street, as she's not able to pay back the rent, she owes her.  so she goes to her friend sybby 'sib' (zasu pitts), cleaning lady in a boarding house or hotel. she puts her in a room of a man, who's not expected for some time, so that she can sleep some hours. the man, adoniram 'schlumpy' schlump (charles farrell) comes back home earlier, than what sybby told him and finds aggie in his bed.
she pretends to be a socialite, from the family of the appleby's, but pitiful, she is broke. he is a gentlemen, very much in love with a lady, evangeline (betty furness), whose letter he's expecting very urgently, beside, he's looking for a job, though he comes from an institution of a family, the schlumps.
aggie calls him "an old goose", before she starts her program of remodeling. and helping him finding a job, in the construction site on the other side of the road, she pretends he is red branaham. while they are remodeling each other, the true red branaham comes out of jail. 
schlump asks aggie to marry him, but she's not sure whether she still loves red, and she fears that their different social and cultural background could become a problem. auntie (blanche friderici) and evangeline pop up at his room, so that aggie has to pretend to be a maid. 
sybby tells her: no, you can't be in love with two men, at the same time, one is an indigestion!
while agnes sends away schlumpy, because she is not the right social level for him, convinced that evangeline is the right one, she finally convinces red to marry her and become floor walker and change his name into schlump, he accepting and saying "but my men hood is gone". the status quo of how society stratums are and have to be, is restored, because aggie tells the men how it has to be.


== cast ==
charles farrell as adoniram "schlumpy" schlump
wynne gibson as agnes "aggie" appleby
william gargan as red branahan
zasu pitts as sybby "sib"
betty furness as evangeline
blanche friderici as aunt katherine


== references ==


== external links ==
aggie appleby maker of men at imdb