agni varsha  is a 2002 indian epic hindi film produced by kashish bhatnagar on i dream productions banner, directed by arjun sajnani. it stars amitabh bachchan, jackie shroff, nagarjuna, milind soman and raveena tandon, with music composed by sandesh shandilya and taufiq qureshi. the film is a silver screen adaptation of girish karnad's mahabharat play the fire and the rain. the film's art direction was handled by shashidhar adapa and choreography was handled by prabhu deva.


== plot ==
in a kingdom stricken with drought for many years, arvasu (milind soman), a brahman loves nittilai (sonali kulkarni) a tribal girl, who seeks approval of her father and village's elders before marrying him. arvasu's brother, paravasu (jackie shroff) has been conducting a major fire sacrifice, the yajna ceremony, for seven long years to appease the god of rains, devraj (amitabh bachchan). arvasu's father, raibhya dislikes both his sons and suspects vishaka (raveena tandon) parvasu's wife, of having an affair with yavakri (nagarjuna), based on the fact that yavarki and vishaka loved each other, before yavarki left village to worship devraj indra in order to attain brahma jnana, supreme divine powers. after his return, yavakri tries pursues vishakha regularly on her way from the well. she, at first, refuses him but ultimately gives up and they start making love in the woods. nittilai and aravasu see them. yavakri detests nittilai's frankness and her doubts as to his divine powers. he curses her to die within a month.
upon reaching home, on being accused of adultery by raibhya, vishakha enraged tells him that she was with yavakri. an enraged raibhya summons a dark force, brahma rakshas (prabhu deva) to kill yavarki. he also declares that yavakri can save himself if he enters the ashram of his father, this shall declare him as a coward. yavakri, wanting to prove his strength waits for the demon to arrive. vishakha warns him and tells him to flee to his father's ashram, which would allow both him and riabhya to live; otherwise, if yavakri defeats the brahma rakshas, raibhya would have to immolate himself. but yavakri refuses to be defensive and a dispute of distrust erupts between yavakri and vishakha, leading to an act of defiance by vishakha. the demon slays yavakri as he now runs to seek refuge in his father's ashram. vishakha pleads arvasu to cremate him; this delays his appointment with nittilai's father and her village elders, and, as a result, she is forced to marry a fellow tribesman.
parvasu sneaks in the night to meet vishakha. vishakha confesses everything and begs him to kill her, but paravasu raises the arrow and shoots at his father. on his way back to yajna site, he is met by the demon, who calls him brother and as a cursed soul seeks salvation at his hands, but paravasu rudely ignores him. the next day when aravasu comes to the yajna site after cremating his father paravasu blames arvasu for the slaying and has him badly beaten up. when nittilai hears of this, she comes to the rescue of arvasu and finds that she is being hunted by her husband and her brother, who will kill her on sight for dishonoring the tribe's customs.
sutradhar (raghuvir yadav) arranges an act to entertain the devas and chooses arvasu an important role. during the act, under the influence of bhang, arvasu goes berserk, destroying the havan and throwing the offerings to the starved locals. nittilai, in an attempt to stop arvasu, exposes herself and is killed by her husband; parvasu admits failure, confessing his murder of his father and cremate's himself in the yajna's pyre. finally appeased, devraj indra appears, and arvasu is allowed a wish of his choice. brahm rakshas comes and begs him to set his soul free while aravasu himself wants nittilai back to live. indra tells him that to bring back nittilai he will have to turn the time back and to set the demon's soul free he will have to turn the time wheel forward. aravasu, with teary eyes, asks indra to set the demon's soul free, which is followed by rain.


== cast ==
amitabh bachchan as devraj
nagarjuna as yavakri
jackie shroff as paravasu
raveena tandon as vishakha
milind soman as arvasu
prabhu deva as rakshasa
mohan agashe as raibhya
kumar iyengar as senior courtier
sonali kulkarni as nittilai
raghuvir yadav as actor manager (sutradhar)
nikita athena rajwade
deepti bhatnagar as item number anchal ki chhaya


== soundtrack ==
music composed by sandesh shandilya. lyrics written by javed akhtar. music released on t-series.


== references ==


== external links ==
agnivarsha: the fire and the rain at imdb
agnivarsha  the fire and the rain at box office mojo