aha! (bengali: !) is a 2007 bangladeshi film, directed and written by enamul karim nirjhar, produced by faridur reza sagar, impress telefilm. it was the first film by enamul karim nirjhar and he won the national film award 2007 as best director and other 3 categories for best cinematography, best editing and best song lukochuri lukochuri golpo by fahmida nabi. he worked with impress telefilm for first time.


== plot ==
mr. mallik (tariq anam khan) lives in a house about a hundred years old, at the old part of dhaka city. real estate companies frequent around his house at old dhaka as they construct multiple apartments. mr. malik is also provided with an offer, to have his house demolished and the conpanies would construct an apartment in its place. this brings mr. malik to a point of dilemma. meanwhile, her daughter, ruba returns from the united states with her 6-year-old daughter, after being abused by her husband. hearing about the offer of demolishing their house from her father, she opposes.
ruba reminisces her memories around the house as she moves from one room to another. all on a sudden, she comes across a piece of red cloth in the balcony next door. it turns out to be a men's underwear owned by their next door neighbor, kislu (humayun faridi), who has the habit of wearing different colored underwears for each day of the week. ruba finds this funny and eventually, gets close with kislu as they start spending more and more time together.
soleman (fazlur rahman babu), who has committed a murder in his earlier life, is now working as a security guard at mr. mallik's house. he often gets involved in fights with the local goons. as mr. malik comes to know about the relation between ruba and kislu, he plans on breaking them up and rescuing his daughter. stories entangle when kislu is found murdered.


== starring ==
humayun faridi as kislu
tariq anam khan as mr. mallik
fazlur rahman babu as soleman
shahidul alam sachchu as rafik
yasmin bilkis sathi
ferdous (guest)
pragya labonii
khaled khan
gazi rakayet


== awards ==
aha! won national film award 2007 in six categories:
best director: enamul karim nirjhar
best female singer: fahmida nabi
best cinematography: saiful islam badal
best editing: arghakamal mitra
best film: impress telefilm
best story: enamul karim nirjharaha! was viewed in many international film festivals in cairo, dubai, munich. it also got the national nomination from bangladesh for the 81st academy awards in the foreign language film category.


== references ==


== external links ==
aha! at imdb