aitbaar (transl.trust) is a 1985 hindi film directed by mukul anand. it stars raj babbar, dimple kapadia, suresh oberoi, danny denzongpa and sharat saxena. it was a remake of alfred hitchcock's 1954 thriller dial m for murder. it was further remade in tamil in 1985 as saavi and in malayalam in 1989 as new year.
the film's music is by bappi lahiri with lyrics by hasan kamaal and farooq kaiser, who gave "kisi nazar ko tera intezar aaj bhi hai", a memorable ghazal duet by asha bhosle and bhupinder singh. the film was classified a by the censor board.


== plot ==
the film opens with jaideep meeting vikramjit on a rainy night and inviting him to his house for drinks. during their conversation, jaideep recounts how his wife, neha, is having an affair with sagar - the story is entirely a ruse to convince vikramjit to help jaideep in exacting revenge on his wife. on receiving refusal, jaideep blackmails vikramjit with a photo of him disposing off a dead body and his knowledge of various aliases maintained to peddle drugs. vikramjit agrees for a sum of inr 1,00,000.
the murder plot is hatched - on a weekend night when jaideep and sagar will be away at a party, vikramjit has to enter the house stealthily and wait in the drawing room until jaideep telephones neha; neha has to come to the drawing room to pick up the telephone and vikramjit has to strangle her, and leave. however, the plan falls apart when neha kills vikramjit in self-defense.
jaideep reaches home and doctors the crime scene to frame neha, who is shocked and vulnerable. the public prosecutor proves her guilt and she is sentenced to prison. however, inspector baruah senses foul play and investigates for the truth to be revealed.
the truth being that neha never had an affair with sagar. both of them were in a relationship before her marriage and reconnected after years, and became friends. jaideep had married neha for her wealth, and concocted the murder plan to frame neha and gain unfettered access to her wealth.
when exposed, jaideep kills himself and neha is proven innocent.


=== difference from the original ===
the film differs in some aspects hitchcock's story - in the original story, when tony wendice realizes he has been found to be guilty, he accepts his crime gracefully whereas in the hindi adaptation, jaideep commits suicide.


== cast ==
raj babbar as jaideep
dimple kapadia as neha khanna
suresh oberoi as sagar
danny denzongpa as inspector barua
sharat saxena as vikramjeet "vicky"
anupam kher as public prosecutor


== soundtrack ==
the music for all the songs were composed by bappi lahiri.


== references ==


== external links ==
aitbaar at imdb
movie review