akele hum akele tum (i'm alone, you are alone) is a 1995 indian hindi-language romantic drama film starring aamir khan, manisha koirala and master adil, and directed by mansoor khan. the music is by anu malik and the lyrics are by majrooh sultanpuri. the film is loosely based on the 1979 american film kramer vs. kramer. both aamir and manisha's performance were acclaimed, the latter also received a nomination under the best actress category at the filmfare awards.


== plot ==
rohit kumar (aamir khan) is an aspiring playback singer while kiran (manisha koirala) is an ambitious classical singer-in-training. they meet, relate to each other's sentiments, fall in love and get married prematurely. when kiran's parents oppose their marriage, they decide to lead a separate life.
however, after marriage, kiran's ambitions take a back seat as she feels suppressed by her household responsibilities and looking after her son. time fails to abate kiran's frustration until she decides to leave rohit and start a new life all over again. now a loner, rohit is forced to look after both his son and his own falling career. after some obvious teething troubles, rohit succeeds in creating a separate world for himself and his son, sunil.
meanwhile, kiran becomes a huge film star. she tries to reconcile with rohit but as luck would have it, rohit is a proud man and misinterprets her support as her pity and things become worse. a court case is eventually filed for the custody of sunil.
rohit faces a tough time preparing for the case as his financial position is not as sound as kiran's. he sells his best songs at a very low price so that he can fight the custody battle. during the court battle, kiran's lawyer bhujbal (paresh rawal) uses every possible trick to show that rohit does not deserve the custody of his child. he even uses the information that rohit had told kiran (only because he felt that she had a right to know about her son's life) against him. rohit instructs his lawyer to fight the case honestly as he does not wish to hurt kiran and her reputation. in the end, the court rules in favor of the mother and kiran is given custody of the child. during this time, common friends of rohit and kiran try to explain to kiran that rohit had changed for the better and that he was now very much attached to his son. kiran also realises that their son would never find happiness only with her. she tells rohit that she will not take sonu away and that she wants him to stay at his own home to which rohit replies that this was kiran's home as well. kiran seemingly moves to get out of the house but then closes the door and smiles.
rohit and kiran hug each other and their son and the movie ends.


== cast ==
aamir khan as rohit kumar
manisha koirala as kiran kumar
adil rizvi as sunil "sonu" kumar
deven verma as kanhaiya
tanvi azmi as farida
rohini hattangadi as mrs. dayal
paresh rawal as advocate bhujbal
aanjjan srivastav as ram dayal
rakesh roshan as paresh kapoor
shafi inamdar as kaushik
satish shah as gulbadan kumar
harish patel as amar
navneet nishan as sunita (kiran's friend)
neeraj vora as moolchand (grocer)
mushtaq khan as mr. bhatija (rohit's lawyer)
veeru krishnan
dinesh hingoo as jamshed (grocer)
anant mahadevan
shashi kiran as ravinder kapoor
suresh bhagwat as prakash (tailor)
razzak khan as babulal
hiralal as hira lal
viju khote (actor playing role of an nri)
ayesha jhulka as award presenter
yunus parvez as mehra (uncredited)
ghanshyam (actor playing role to insult an nri)
jennifer winget as young girl


== music ==
the music is given by anu malik and the lyrics were penned by majrooh sultanpuri. for this, he received a nomination for filmfare best music director award. tracks like "raja ko rani se pyaar", "dil mera churaya kyun", "akele hum akele tum" and "dil kehta hai" became immensely popular. the song "raja ko rani se" is borrowed from the godfather theme.
the song aisa zakham diya hai sampled the famous 70s psychedelic rock song "child in time", performed by the english rock band deep purple, while dil mera churaya kyun is inspired from "last christmas" by wham!. in existence is an unreleased version of the soundtrack, 'dil mera churaya kyun', sung by udit narayan, but never made it to the original soundtrack nor motion picture. 


== references ==


== external links ==
akele hum akele tum at imdb