akkada ammayi ikkada abbayi (english: the girl from that side, the boy from this side) is a 1996 telugu film produced by allu aravind under geeta arts banner, directed by e. v. v. satyanarayana, starring pawan kalyan and supriya in the lead roles. the music of the film was by koti. this film is the official remake of the 1988 hindi film qayamat se qayamat tak.the film marks the debut of pawan kalyan, the younger brother of chiranjeevi, in the telugu film industry. it is also the debut and the only film appearance of yarlagadda supriya, the granddaughter of akkineni nageswara rao (sumanth's sister) at that moment until goodachari. pawan kalyan got recognition for his martial arts performed in the movie.


== plot ==
harichandra prasad (nazar) and vishnu murthy (saratbabu) are two rich and powerful rivals in a village. harichandra prasad's daughter supriya (supriya, 20) and vishnu murthy's son kalyan (pawan kalyan, 23) study in the same college, where they both engage in few fights and bets. kalyan and his gang attempt to enter a girls hostel and succeeds at last, and he wins a bet with supriya. slowly their love blossoms under these petty things and they reach their village, where they are separated at the railway station by their parents. the vacation ends and kalyan reaches the station to get back to his college, but supriya does not turn up. kalyan learns that her marriage is fixed, and gets off the train to reach supriya's house. but he is thrashed by harichandra prasad and his men. meanwhile, her marriage is postponed due to her grandmother's (76) death. using this to their advantage, kalyan and supriya elope. her brother (23) and his men become involved in a fight with kalyan. in the end, vishnu murthy saves harichandra prasad from being drowned in an abyss, and suddenly everyone realizes their mistake and reunite the lovers and get them married.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music is composed by koti. lyrics are written by veturi sundararama murthy. the music was released on lahari music.


== references ==


== external links ==
akkada ammayi ikkada abbayi at imdb