alfie is a 1966 british romantic comedy-drama film directed by lewis gilbert and starring michael caine. it is an adaptation by bill naughton of his own 1966 novel and 1963 play of the same name. the film was released by paramount pictures.
alfie tells the story of a young womanising man who leads a self-centred life, purely for his own enjoyment, until events force him to question his uncaring behaviour, his loneliness and his priorities. he cheats on numerous women, and despite his confidence towards women, he treats them with disrespect and refers to them as "it", using them for sex and for domestic purposes. alfie frequently breaks the fourth wall by speaking directly to the camera narrating and justifying his actions. his words often contrast with or totally contradict his actions.
this was the first film to receive the "suggested for mature audiences" classification by the motion picture association of america in the us, which evolved into the modern pg rating. the film had its world premiere at the plaza theatre in the west end of london on 24 march 1966.


== plot ==
a handsome cockney, self-centered, narcissistic chauffeur in london named alfred (alfie) elkins enjoys the sexual favours of married and single women, while avoiding any commitment.  he ends an affair with a married woman, siddie, just as he gets his submissive single girlfriend, gilda, pregnant. alfie thinks nothing of pilfering fuel and money from his employer, and tells gilda to do the same. although alfie refuses to marry gilda and cheats on her constantly, gilda decides to have the child, a boy named malcolm alfred, and keep him rather than give him up for adoption.
over time, alfie becomes quite attached to his delightful son, but his unwillingness to marry gilda causes her to break up with him and marry humphrey, a kindly bus conductor and neighbour of hers who loves her and is willing to accept malcolm alfred as his own son. she also bars alfie from any further contact with malcolm, forcing alfie to watch from a distance as humphrey steps into his fatherly role. when a health check reveals alfie has tubercular shadows on his lungs, the diagnosis, and his fear of death, combined with his separation from his son, leads him to have a brief mental breakdown.
alfie spends time in a convalescent home, where he befriends a fellow patient named harry, a family man devoted to his frumpy wife lily. alfie makes out with one of the nurses, which disgusts harry. alfie thinks nothing of cheating, lying, stealing, or taking other men's wives. when alfie flippantly suggests that lily might be cheating on harry, harry angrily confronts alfie about his attitudes and behaviour. alfie is released from the home and briefly stops working as a chauffeur to take holiday photos of tourists near the tower of london for five shillings each. here he meets ruby, an older, voluptuous, affluent and promiscuous american, who, even though she is accompanied by an older gentleman, gives him her address and telephone number. alfie returns to the convalescent home to visit harry, who asks him to give his wife lily a ride home. neither alfie nor lily initially want to spend time together, but they agree to please harry, and the ride home turns into a one-night stand.
later, alfie becomes a chauffeur again and picks up a young red-headed hitchhiker, annie, from sheffield, who is looking to make a fresh start in london. he manages to steal her away from a lorry driver who had given her a lift, and she moves in with him. annie proves preoccupied with a love left behind, scrubbing alfie's floor, doing his laundry, and preparing his meals to compensate. the lorry driver finds him in a pub, punches him in the face and a barroom brawl ensues. alfie comes home with a big black eye. he grows resentful of annie and drives her out with an angry outburst, immediately regretting it. around the same time, lily informs him that she is pregnant from their one encounter, and the two plan for her to have an illegal abortion to keep harry from finding out. lily comes to his flat to meet the abortionist. during the abortion, alfie leaves lily and walks around. he catches sight of his son malcolm outside a church, and witnesses the baptism of gilda and humphrey's new daughter. he watches as they exit the church as a family. the abortion proves traumatic for both lily and alfie, with alfie breaking down in tears upon seeing the aborted fetus, the only time alfie truly confronts the consequences of his own actions.
the stress of the situations with annie and lily makes alfie decide to change his non-committal ways and settle down with the rich ruby. however, upon visiting ruby, he finds a younger man in her bed. he encounters siddie again, but she has lost interest in him and returned to her husband. alfie is left lonely and wondering about his life's choices, then asks the viewers "what's it all about? you know what i mean."


== cast ==


== production ==
the film is unusual in that it has no opening credits and the end credits feature photos of the principal actors, as well as of the main technical crew, including director gilbert and cameraman otto heller. it was shot at twickenham studios with scenes shot at several locations in london; including waterloo bridge which is seen at the beginning and end of the film where the title character walks into the distance accompanied by a stray dog and tower bridge which is the backdrop for the photography scene with shelley winters.several leading actors, including richard harris, laurence harvey, james booth and anthony newley turned down the title role due to the then-taboo subject matter. despite having played "alfie" on broadway, terence stamp categorically declined to reprise the role on film, so he and casting agents approached his good friend and then roommate michael caine: not one to then snub a role about a common man, caine agreed to do it. he received a positive reception for the role.


== music ==
the original film soundtrack featured jazz saxophonist sonny rollins with london musicians including stan tracey on piano, who improvised "little malcolm loves his dad" (although never credited), rick laird on bass, phil seamen on drums, ronnie scott on tenor sax.
the sonny rollins album alfie, orchestrated and conducted by oliver nelson, was recorded in the united states in january 1966. it features rollins with j.j. johnson  trombone (tracks 1 & 2), jimmy cleveland  trombone (tracks 36), phil woods  alto saxophone, bob ashton  tenor saxophone, danny bank  baritone saxophone, roger kellaway  piano, kenny burrell  guitar, walter booker  bass and frankie dunlop  drums
the title song, "alfie", written by burt bacharach and hal david, was sung by cher over the film's closing credits in the us release reaching #32 on the billboard hot 100 chart. it became a hit for british singer cilla black (millicent martin sang alfie on its british release) and for madeline eastman and dionne warwick.


== reception ==
on rotten tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 96%, based on reviews from 27 critics, with an average rating of 7.98/10. the site's consensus states: "anchored by michael caine's charmingly droll performance, alfie is an equally raucous and heart-rending portrait of romance in the swinging '60s." 


== awards and recognition ==
academy awardsbest picture: lewis gilbert  nominated
best actor: michael caine  nominated
best supporting actress: vivien merchant  nominated
best screenplay  based on material from another medium: bill naughton  nominated
best original song: burt bacharach, hal david  nominatedbritish academy film awardsbest british film: lewis gilbert  nominated
best british actor in a leading role: michael caine  nominated
most promising newcomer to leading film roles: vivien merchant  won
best british screenplay: bill naughton  nominated
best cinematography: otto heller  nominated
best editing: thelma connell  nominatedgolden globe awardsbest english-language foreign film  won
best director: lewis gilbert  nominated
best actor  motion picture drama: michael caine  nominated
best supporting actress  motion picture: vivien merchant  nominated
best supporting actress  motion picture: shelley winters  nominated
best screenplay: bill naughton  nominated
best original song: burt bacharach, hal david  nominatedcannes film festivalpalme d'or: lewis gilbert  nominated
special jury prize: lewis gilbert  won


== legacy ==
the 1966 film was followed by alfie darling (1975), with alan price replacing caine. an updated 2004 remake starred jude law in the title role.


=== references in popular culture ===
much dialogue from the film was sampled by the band carter usm for their 1991 album 30 something.
the lp, nino tempo's rock 'n roll beach party (1956 liberty records ... lrp3023) can be seen hanging in alfie's apartment in several key scenes.
new york post-hardcore band polar bear club references "alfie elkins '66" in their song "drifting thing" off their 2009 release chasing hamburg.
the soundtrack to austin powers in goldmember (in which caine co-stars) contains a song entitled "alfie (what's it all about austin)" performed by susanna hoffs. this song is a cover of the original film's title song, with all occurrences of "alfie" replaced with "austin".
the film inspired the divine comedy's becoming more like alfie, which samples its opening dialogue in its introduction.
guitarist jeff beck quoted the main musical theme from the title song in his instrumental showpiece "jeff's boogie," released a few months after the film's premiere.
singer/songwriter tori amos performed the theme from alfie as part of her repertoire as a teen, and references it in the song "gold dust" from her 2002 scarlet's walk album.
british pop art artist, pauline boty, makes a brief appearance as the manageress of a dry-cleaner's whom alfie visits for sex. boty died just over three months after the film's uk premiere.


== see also ==
bfi top 100 british films


== references ==


== external links ==
alfie at imdb
alfie at rotten tomatoes
"michael caine's russian home" (in russian). caine-home.narod.ru. retrieved 31 march 2008., screenshots from the film