alibi ike is a 1935 american romantic comedy film directed by ray enright and starring joe e. brown and olivia de havilland. based on the short story of the same name by ring lardner, first published in the saturday evening post on july 31, 1915, the film is about an ace baseball player nicknamed "alibi ike" due to his penchant for making up excuses. lardner is said to have patterned the character after baseball player king cole.
alibi ike was the most successful of joe e. brown's "baseball trilogy" of films, which also included elmer the great and fireman save my child. it is considered one of the best baseball comedies of all time. alibi ike was the first feature film released starring olivia de havilland, although she made two previous films that were released later that yearthe irish in us and a midsummer night's dream.
a print of the film is held by the library of congress.


== plot ==
frank x. farrell (joe e. brown) is an ace baseball player whose insistence on making excuses earns him the nickname "alibi ike." in the course of his first season with the chicago cubs, farrell falls in love with dolly stevens (olivia de havilland), sister-in-law of the team's manager. farrell's "alibi" habit prompts dolly to walk out on him, after which he goes into a slump  which coincides with attempts by gamblers to get farrell to throw the world series.


== cast ==
joe e. brown as frank x. farrell
olivia de havilland as dolly stevens
william frawley as cap
ruth donnelly as bess
roscoe karns as carey
eddie shubert as jack mack
paul harvey as lefty crawford
joe king as johnson, the owner
g. pat collins as lieutenant
spencer charters as minister
gene morgan as smittycast notes:

several popular major league baseball players make cameo appearances in the film, including guy cantrell, dick cox, cedric durst, mike gazella, wally hood, don hurst, smead jolley, lou koupal, bob meusel, wally rehg, and jim thorpe.


== references ==


== external links ==
alibi ike at the american film institute catalog
alibi ike at imdb
alibi ike at the tcm movie database
alibi ike at allmovie
"alibi ike" by ring lardner (text)