all the wrong reasons is a 2013 canadian comedy-drama film written and directed by gia milani. it stars karine vanasse, cory monteith, kevin zegers and emily hampshire. the film was released at the 2013 toronto international film festival.


== plot ==
the film is set in the fairfax department store, a big-box outlet in which kate ascher (vanasse) works as a security guard while her husband james (monteith) is the store's manager. kate is unable to touch other people - including her husband - or even have them near her due to the traumatic stress of seeing her sister commit suicide. after james tries unsuccessfully to bring kate out of her isolation, he pursues intimacy from one of the store's cashiers, nicole (hampshire).
simon brunson (zegers) joins the store staff. he faces his own stresses after being injured in his former job as a firefighter. his efforts to deal with his situation inspires kate to lash out against her cheating husband, ruin his career and cost nicole custody of her son, which allows kate to begin her recovery of a normal life with simon.


== cast ==


== production ==
shooting was conducted in halifax during mid-2012 and concluded on 15 august 2012. the film was produced by shore road pictures (gia milani & tony whalen) and buffalo gal pictures (phyllis laing).funding for the film was provided by telefilm canada, the province of new brunswick, nova scotia tax credits, pacific northwest pictures and myriad pictures. it is slated to air on the movie network and movie central in 2014. pacific northwest pictures is the canadian distributor while international sales is handled by myriad pictures.


== awards and nominations ==
the film won the grolsch film works discovery award at the 2013 toronto international film festival.the film won the viewer's choice award at the silver wave film festivaldenis theriault was nominated by actra maritimes for outstanding male performance feature film, movie of the week, television, or web-series for his role as radley weil in all the wrong reasons.the screenplay won the slamdance film festival's 2009 script accessible award as part of that festival's feature screenplay competition.


== festivals ==
2013 toronto international film festival, toronto, ontario, 8 september 2013.atlantic film festival, cbc/telefilm atlantic gala film, halifax, nova scotia, 13 september 2013.cinfest sudbury international film festival, sudbury, ontario, 22 september 2013.vancouver international film festival, canadian images opening gala film, vancouver, british columbia, 27 september 2013.festival du nouveau cinma, montreal, quebec, 22 october 2013.st. john's international women's film festival, st. john's, newfoundland, 25 october 2013.silver wave film festival, fredericton, new brunswick, 7 november 2013.windsor international film festival, windsor, ontario, 9 november 2013.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
all the wrong reasons at imdb
all the wrong reasons at rotten tomatoes
all the wrong reasons at shore road pictures