allari pidugu (transl.naughty thunder) is a 2005 indian telugu-language action film produced by m. r. v. prasad on p. b. r. art productions banner, directed by jayanth c. paranjee. the film stars nandamuri balakrishna, katrina kaif, and charmy kaur, while puneet issar and mukesh rishi play supporting roles. the music was composed by mani sharma with cinematography by ajayan vincent and editing by marthand k. venkatesh. the film released on 5 october 2005.


== plot ==
major chakravarthy (puneet issar) has two sons: ranjit and giri (both played by nandamuri balakrishna). giri is the younger one. he is the village guy and is in love with his cousin subbalakshmi (charmy kaur). ranjit turns into an acp and meets his match in swati (katrina kaif). g. k. (mukesh rishi) is an mp whose antisocial activities are contained by ranjit. also, chakravarthy, who spends 14 years in prison after being falsely charged by g. k. in a case, is released. before 14 years, a secret military mission was failed in where he became responsible because g. k. was the main conspirator. g. k. still plans to take revenge on the family, but the person who comes to the rescue of the family and the people threatened by the villain's plans is giri. the story is how he ends as the winner, by saving lives and winning respect from his father.


== cast ==


== crew ==
art: ashok
choreography: raja shekar, siva shankar, tarun kumar, chinni prakash
fights: vikram dharma
story - screenplay - dialogues: paruchuri brothers
lyrics: veturi sundararama murthy, bhaskarabhatla, sahiti, kandikonda, jaladanki
playback: sp balu, chitra, karthik, ranjith, mallikarjun, sunitha, sujatha,  mahalakshmi iyer, suchitra, sri vardhini
music: mani sharma
editing: marthand k. venkatesh
cinematography: ajayan vincent
producer: m. r. v. prasad
director: jayanth c. paranjee
banner: p. b. r. art productions
release date: 5 october 2005


== soundtrack ==
music composed by mani sharma. music released on aditya music company.


== external links ==
allari pidugu at imdb