alligator is a 1980 satirical horror film directed by lewis teague and written by john sayles. it stars robert forster, robin riker and michael v. gazzo. it also includes an appearance by actress sue lyon in her last screen role.
set in chicago, the film follows a police officer and a reptile expert to track a giant murderous sewer alligator, flushed down the toilet years earlier, that is attacking residents after escaping from the sewers.
critics lauded the film for its intentional satirizing. a direct-to-video sequel was released in 1991, entitled alligator ii: the mutation. despite the title, this film shared no characters or actors with the original, and the plot was essentially a retread of the first film. a tabletop game based on the film was distributed by the ideal toy company in 1980.


== plot ==
a teenage girl purchases a baby american alligator while on vacation with her family at a tourist trap in florida. after the family returns home to chicago, the girl's surly, animal-phobic father promptly flushes the alligator, whom the girl had named ramn, down the family's toilet and into the city's sewers.
twelve years later, the alligator survives by feeding on covertly discarded pet carcasses. these animals had been used as test subjects for an experimental growth formula intended to increase agricultural livestock meat production. however, the project was abandoned because the formula unintentionally massively increased the animal's metabolism, causing it to develop an insatiable appetite. during the years, the baby alligator accumulated concentrated amounts of this formula from feeding on these carcasses, causing it to mutate, growing into a 36 foot (11 m) monster resembling a deinosuchus-purussaurus hybrid, as well as having an almost-impenetrable hide.
the alligator begins ambushing and devouring sewer workers it encounters in the sewer, and the resulting flow of body parts draws in world-weary police officer david madison (robert forster) who, after a horribly botched case in st. louis, has gained a reputation for being lethally unlucky for his assigned partners. as david works on this new case, his boss chief clark (michael gazzo) introduces him to reptiles expert marisa kendall (robin riker), the woman who, as a teenager, bought the alligator years earlier, unaware that this alligator is her former pet. the two of them edge into a prickly romantic relationship, and during a visit to marisa's house, david bonds with her motor-mouthed mother.
david's reputation as a partner-killer is confirmed when the alligator snags a young cop, kelly (perry lang), who accompanies david into the sewer searching for clues. no one believes david's story, due to a lack of a body, and partly because of slade (dean jagger), the influential local tycoon who sponsored the illegal growth experiments and therefore wants the truth concealed. this changes when obnoxious tabloid reporter thomas kemp (bart braverman), one of the banes of david's existence, goes snooping in the sewers and supplies graphic and indisputable photographic evidence of the beast while sacrificing his own life. the story quickly garners public attention, and a citywide hunt for the monster is called for.
after the police unsuccessfully attempt to flush out the alligator, david is put on suspension. the alligator escapes from the sewers and comes to the surface, first killing a police officer and later a young boy who, during a party, is tossed into a swimming pool in which the alligator is residing.
the ensuing hunt continues, including the hiring of pompous big-game hunter colonel brock (henry silva) to track the animal. once again, the effort fails: brock is killed, the police trip over each other confusedly, and the alligator goes on a rampage through a high-society wedding party hosted at slade's mansion; among its victims are slade himself, the mayor (jack carter), and slade's chief scientist for the hormone experiments and intended son-in-law. marisa and david finally lure the alligator into the sewers before setting off explosives on the alligator, killing it. as david and marisa walk away from the explosion, a drain in the sewer spits out another baby alligator that is unseen by anyone, thus potentially repeating the cycle all over again.


== cast ==
robert forster as david madison
robin riker as marisa kendall
michael v. gazzo as chief clark (credited as michael gazzo)
dean jagger as slade
sydney lassick as luke gutchel (credited as sidney lassick)
jack carter as the mayor
perry lang as officer jim kelly
henry silva as colonel brock
bart braverman as thomas kemp
angel tompkins as newswoman
sue lyon as abc newswoman
royce d. applegate as callan
jim boeke as shamsky
peter miller as sgt. rice
pat petersen as joey
micole mercurio as joey's mother (credited as micol)
dick richards as alligator vendor 2
kendall carly browne as ann
mike mazurki as gatekeeper (credited as michael mazurki)
kane hodder as ramn the alligator (uncredited).


== production ==
location shooting took place in and around los angeles. although commentary on the lions gate entertainment dvd gives the location as chicago, the police vehicles in the film appear to have missouri license plates. when the young marisa returns home with her family from their vacation in florida, they pass a sign that reads "welcome to missouri". later, the voice of a newscaster identifies marisa as "a native of our city", implying the location is a city in missouri other than st. louis. bryan cranston worked as a special-effects assistant on this film, in charge of making and rigging "the alligator guts" for the film's finale.


== reception ==
the film has received mixed to positive reviews both during and since its release. on rotten tomatoes, it holds an 80% approval rating with an average of 5.84/10 based on 20 reviews. vincent canby of the new york times reviewed the film in a positive light, writing that its "suspense is frequently as genuine as its wit and its fond awareness of the clichs [it uses]". jim knipfel of the website den of geek awarded the film 4.5 out of 5 stars, calling it "intelligent and stylish". kim newman of empire praised its "witty" script, "solid performances, effective effects", and "spirited b-level direction". however, roger ebert gave the film one out of four stars, suggesting that it would be best to "flush this movie down the toilet to see if it also grows into something big and fearsome." film historian leonard maltin, on the other hand, gave the movie 3 out of a possible 4 stars: "if you've got to make a movie about a giant alligator, this is the way to do it...and don't miss the graffiti in the final scene."
alligator, along with films such as grizzly (1976), orca (1977) and piranha (1978), is considered by some to be a "rip-off" film made to capitalize on the success of the film jaws (1975), whose main antagonist is a man-eating great white shark. john sayles, who wrote the script for alligator, also created the screenplay for piranha two years earlier.in an interview, filmmaker quentin tarantino said that robert forster's character, david madison, inspired the character max cherry (also played by forster) of his 1997 film jackie brown.


== sequel ==


== home media releases ==
on september 18, 2007, lions gate entertainment released the film on dvd for the first time in the united states. the disc features a new 16x9 anamorphic widescreen transfer in the original 1.78:1 ratio and a new dolby digital 5.1-channel sound mix in addition to the original mono mix. the included extras are a commentary track with director lewis teague and star robert forster, a featurette titled alligator author in which screenwriter john sayles discusses the differences between his original story and the final screenplay, and the original theatrical trailer.
the film had previously been available on dvd in other territories, including a version released in the united kingdom in february 2003 by anchor bay entertainment. this release features an optional dts sound mix, includes the sequel alligator ii: the mutation (1991) on a second disc, and includes the same teague-forster commentary found on the recent lions gate u.s. release.


== see also ==
list of natural horror films


== references ==


== external links ==
alligator at the american film institute catalog
alligator at imdb
alligator at rotten tomatoes
alligator at allmovie