amar akbar anthony is a 2015 indian malayalam-language comedy thriller film directed by nadirshah and written by bibin george and vishnu unnikrishnan. it stars prithviraj sukumaran, jayasurya and indrajith sukumaran. the music is composed by nadirshah, while the background music is given by bijibal. it was released on 16 october 2015.
the production of amar akbar anthony was completed in 65 days with a cost of 6.70 crore (us$940,000). it earned a major commercial success at the box office. its soundtrack was released by the sony music india. the film is remade in kannada 2016 comedy drama film john jani janardhan.


== plot ==
the film centers on three bachelor friends who live in the same colony kochi. their struggle is to live a luxurious life and to visit thailand. the bike-stunt master and travel agent asif ali, as "faizal", is also living in the same colony. he receives several injuries when he met an accident while performing bike-stunts. he is then admitted in a hospital where he meets other patients. faizal explains the reason of accident to the other patients by narrating a story about his three clients amar, akbar and anthony. all the friends are living a middle-class life.
amar's father ramanan works as a security officer at atm counter, while his mother is a marriage broker. his mother arranges the marriage of orphan woman resmiya. after an interval, remiya's husband runs off with her jewellery hence resmiya comes to amar's house to stay with her kid fathima whom they lovingly call pathu.
akbar, amar's close friend is a handicap person. his father, stalin mammali, is a body builder, while his mother jameela is the housewife.
anthony, another friend works as a pizza delivery boy at a mall. anthony is an adopted child. his stepfather pradeep kottayam found him left alone inside a movie theatre.
all the friends have a common enemy nallavanyana unni aka unni. apart from their usual work, they occasionally work as catering service boys for marriages and other functions under the supervision of rejimon. his grandmother, usually engages herself with multiple social networking sites. she created a fake facebook account and tried to make amar fall in love with her.
all three friends have a crush on jenny, a dancer. they planned to take her to the beach in thailand. their only goal and dream is to visit pattaya, thailand along with a bar dancer. however, due to family issues, their "aim gets delayed each time". meanwhile, amar's father met with an accident and the money which was saved by the three friends was spent on his father's treatment. akbar was unaware of amar's love story. his friends jenny, disclosed his story before akbar. meanwhile, when they were told that their neighbor "fathima" had been murdered by a bengali killer, they went to search the criminal.
faizal discontinuous his story. the patients liked his story. faizal is basically a travel agent at pattaya tour and travel.


== cast ==
prithviraj as amar aka amarnath
jayasurya as akbar aka akku
indrajith as anthony aka thalapathy
akanksha puri as gauri, amar's girlfriend (cameo)
namitha pramod as jenny
asif ali as faizal (extended cameo)
baby meenakshi as fathima aka pathumma
srinda ashab as resmina,  fathima's mother
shafique rahman as dhappan
v. k. sreeraman  as mash
kalabhavan shajohn as jadayi sabu
sasi kalinga as ramanan, amar's father
abu salim as stalin mammali, akbar's father
pradeep kottayam as chakkappan, anthony's father
saju navodaya as rejimon aka durantham reji
ramesh pisharody as nallavanaya unni
dharmajan bolgatty as 'black' suni
siddique as c.i sethunath v. r.
k. p. a. c. lalitha as chandrika, amar's mother
bindu panicker as jameela, akbar's mother
priyanka anoop as anthony's mother
harimurali as amalnath, amar's brother
ena saha as amar's girlfriend
tarushi jha as amar's girlfriend
ponnamma babu as gauri's mother
molly kannamaly as ammachy
pauly valsan as fish seller
mareena michael as angel
sona heiden as sajeevan's wife
chali pala as sajeevan
iniya as item dancer (cameo)
vishnu unnikrishnan as rogue man (cameo)
bibin george as furniture shop employee (cameo)
sujith vasudev as himself (cameo)
thesni khan as nurse
t. s. padannayil as patient
nandhu pothuval as swami


== production ==
nadirshah made his successful debut with amar akbar anthony. mimicry artists, script writers along with bibin and vishnu completed the film screenplay in three years. they told the script to nadirshah they knew for a long time. at listening to the script, nadirshah showed interest.the film was originally scheduled for 70 days with an estimated budget of 7 crore (us$980,000). however, it was completed in 65 days with an approximate production cost 6.70 crore (us$940,000).


== release ==
the film was released on 16 october 2015 in india. the television satellite was sold to surya tv. sony music india released the trailer on 5 october 2015. one day before the official release, its trailer was leaked on the video sharing website youtube on 4 october which was later removed by the website. the trailer was viewed by the two lakh viewers in just two days.


=== critical reception ===
international business times rated the film by 4/5. the film also revolves around the social issues and how to deal it. sify.com stated that "how much you enjoy amar akbar anthony will depend on your liking for loud, verbal comedy. even if you are not a great fan of such jokes, this film can keep you entertained." filmibeat rated the film 3 out of 5 calling it "comical extravaganza" the reviewer also noted that the film is indeed a good one that revolves around both comedy and social issues. . malayala manorama, a morning newspaper in malayalam published from kottayam, kerala, rated 3 out of 5. according to the company, "as the film tries to capture everything in the running time. nadhirshah skilfully maintains a pace in the plot and effortlessly switches between fillers, comedy and thriller, like a seasoned director".


=== box office ===
at kerala, the film earned 5.10 crore (us$720,000) in 3 days and 52 lakhs from the rest of the other indian states. it earned more than 11.20 crore within 8 days of its official release with a net amount of 9.02 crore. during the first 14 days, it claimed to have made 16.3 crore and 22.6 crore (us$3.2 million) in 21 days. the film collected approximately  28.5 crore (us$4.0 million) from the worldwide cinemas in 45 days. the film was played for over 100 days in indian theatres.


== music ==
the audios were officially launched by nivin pauly and dileep at an event which was organised by the filmmakers at kochi on 9 october.the first mp4 song "premamennal" sung by prithviraj sukumaran, indrajith sukumaran, jayasurya and kalabhavan shajon was released on 14 october by sony music india. the song "yenno njanente" featuring baby meenakshi is sung by sreya jayadeep was released on 22 october. the romantic song "manjaadum" lyrics are written in  malayalam, hindi and tamil.


== awards ==
the film won the following awards:

kerala state film awardsspecial jury mention - baby sreya


== references ==


== external links ==
amar akbar anthony on facebook
amar akbar anthony at imdb