amar bondhu rashed (bengali:   , english: my friend rashed) is a 2011 bangladeshi film directed by morshedul islam, known for making indie movies. the story is based on the novel amar bondhu rashed by muhammad zafar iqbal. and set during the bangladesh liberation war and bangladesh genocide. the movie was released on 1 april 2011. music directed by rizvi hasan.


== plot ==
this a story of a boy named ibu during bangladesh liberation war in 1971. he lives in a small town. the main character rashed suddenly appears at his school. rashed, the name was given by the class teacher at the first day at school. in 1971, when other students are not conscious about the liberation movement rashed could understand the matters. rashed started to motivate others to make them understand those matters. one day, pakistani army attacks the town and rashed observes the battle. he and his friends start to help the mukti bahini.


== cast ==
chowdhury zawata afnan as rashed
rayaan ittesham chowdhury as ibu
rizvi hasan
refayat zinnat as fazlu
faiyaz bin zia as asraf
shovon jaman
likhon rahi as dilip
kaosar abedin as kader
arman parvez murad as shafiq bhai
humaira himu  as aru apa
raisul islam asad as senior ibu
kazi rayhan rabbi as ibu's son
pijush banerjee as ibu's father
wahida mollick jolly as ibu's mother
inamul huque as majid sir
gazi rakayet as ajraf ali
kamol ghosh as dilip's father
kholilur rahman kadery as doctor


== production ==
amar bondhu rashed was based on the novel of the same name by professor muhammad zafar iqbal and was adapted by filmmaker morshedul islam. this is the second collaboration between zafar igbal and morshedul islam following dipu number 2. it was jointly produced by monon chalachitra and impress telefilm ltd and was partially funded by a grant from the government of bangladesh. ashirbad chalachitra was the distributor of the film.


== release ==
amar bondhu rashed was released on 1 april 2011 in dhaka, khulna, rajshahi, and dinajpur in bangladesh. the premier of the movie was held in star cineplex in dhaka. the pabna district police and pathshala, a non-profit organization, jointly organized the screening of the movie in 30 school and colleges in the district. the movie was screen at shahjalal university of science and technology where the write of the book, muhammad zafar iqbal, is a faculty member. on 23 may 2011, it was screen in manikganj district. on 16 july 2011 the movie was screened at rajshahi university. the movie was screened at the 7th annual south asian film festival in 2012. it was screened at the  6th international children's film festival, organized by children's film society of bangladesh, in khulna in 2013. the movie was screened at a film festival organized by the theatre and film department of bangladesh shilpakala academy in 2013.


=== reception ===
tamana khan wrote in her review for the daily star wrote that it was  a "commendable effort to bring something entertaining for children but one that could have been done with a little more finesse". she praised the attempt but felt the adaption did not develop the relationship between the characters by leaving out some of the scenes from the book. the daily star placed it on a list of "essential bangla movies for children" list in 2015 and on a list of 5 "memorable films" on the bangladesh liberation war in 2017.


== see also ==
dipu number two


== references ==


== external links ==
my friend rashed (amar bondhu rashed) at imdb