amistad is a 1997 american historical drama film directed by steven spielberg, based on the events in 1839 aboard the slave ship la amistad, during which mende tribesmen abducted for the slave trade managed to gain control of their captors' ship off the coast of cuba, and the international legal battle that followed their capture by the washington, a u.s. revenue cutter. the case was ultimately resolved by the u.s. supreme court in 1841.
morgan freeman, anthony hopkins, djimon hounsou, and matthew mcconaughey had starring roles. david franzoni's screenplay was based on the 1987 book mutiny on the amistad: the saga of a slave revolt and its impact on american abolition, law, and diplomacy, by the historian howard jones.
the film received largely positive critical reviews and grossed over $44 million at the us box office.


== plot ==
la amistad is a slave ship transporting captured africans from spanish cuba to the united states in 1839. joseph cinqu, a leader of the africans, leads a mutiny and takes over the ship. the mutineers spare the lives of two spanish navigators to help them sail the ship back to africa. instead, the navigators misdirect the africans and sail directly north to the east coast of the united states, where the ship is stopped by the american navy, and the surviving africans imprisoned as runaway slaves.
in an unfamiliar country and not speaking a single word of english, the africans find themselves in a legal battle. united states attorney william s. holabird brings charges of piracy and murder. secretary of state john forsyth, on behalf of president martin van buren (who is campaigning for re-election), represents the claim of the spanish government that the african captives are property of spain based on a treaty. two naval officers, thomas r. gedney, and richard w. meade, claim them as salvage while the two spanish navigators, pedro montez and jose ruiz, produce proof of purchase. a lawyer named roger sherman baldwin, hired by the abolitionist lewis tappan and his black associate theodore joadson, decides to defend the africans.
baldwin argues that the africans had been kidnapped from the british colony of sierra leone to be sold in the americas illegally. baldwin proves through documents found hidden aboard la amistad that the african captives were initially cargo belonging to a portuguese slave ship, the tecora. therefore, the africans were free citizens of sierra leone and not slaves at all. in light of this evidence, the staff of president van buren has the judge presiding over the case replaced by judge coglin, who is younger and believed to be impressionable and easily influenced. consequently, seeking to make the case more personal, on the advice of former american president (and lawyer) john quincy adams, baldwin and joadson find james covey, a former slave who speaks both mende and english. cinque tells his story at trial: cinque was kidnapped by slave traders outside his village, and held in the slave fortress of lomboko, where thousands of captives were held under heavy guard. cinque and many others were then sold to the tecora, where they were held in the brig of the ship. the captives were beaten and whipped, and at times, were given so little food that they had to eat the food from each other's faces. one day, fifty captives were thrown overboard. later on, the ship arrived in havana, cuba. those captives that were not sold at auction were handed over to la amistad.
united states attorney holabird attacks cinqu's "tale" of being captured and kept in the slave fortress, and especially questions the throwing of precious cargo overboard. holabird contends that cinque could have been made a debt slave by his fellow sierra leoneans. however, the royal navy's fervent abolitionist captain fitzgerald of the west africa squadron backs up cinqu's account. baldwin shows from the tecoras inventory that the number of african people taken as slaves was reduced by fifty. fitzgerald explains that some slave ships when interdicted do this to get rid of the evidence for their crime but in the tecoras case, they had underestimated the amount of provisions necessary for their journey. as the tension rises, cinqu stands up from his seat and repeatedly says, "give us, us free!"
judge coglin rules in favor of the africans. after pressure from senator john c. calhoun of south carolina on president van buren, the case is appealed to the supreme court. despite refusing to help when the case was initially presented, adams agrees to assist with the case. at the supreme court, he makes an impassioned and eloquent plea for their release, and is successful.
the lomboko slave fortress is liberated by the royal marines under the command of captain fitzgerald. after all the slaves are removed from the fortress, fitzgerald orders the ship's cannon to destroy it. he then dictates a letter to forsyth saying that he was correct  the slave fortress did not exist.
because of the release of the africans, van buren loses his re-election campaign, and tension builds between the north and the south, which eventually culminates in the civil war.
cinqu eventually returns to his homeland, but never reunites with his family.


== cast ==

retired u.s. supreme court justice harry blackmun also appears in the film as justice joseph story.


== production ==


=== music ===
the musical score for amistad was composed by john williams. a soundtrack album was released on december 9, 1997 by dreamworks records. the lyrics from "dry your tears, afrika" are from a 1967 poem by french-speaking ivorian poet bernard binlin dadi. the words are primarily in mende, one of sierra leone's major languages.


== historical accuracy ==
many academics, including columbia university professor eric foner, have criticized amistad for historical inaccuracy and the misleading characterizations of the amistad case as a "turning point" in the american perspective on slavery. foner wrote: "in fact, the amistad case revolved around the atlantic slave trade  by 1840 outlawed by international treaty  and had nothing whatsoever to do with slavery as a domestic institution. incongruous as it may seem, it was perfectly possible in the nineteenth century to condemn the importation of slaves from africa while simultaneously defending slavery and the flourishing slave trade within the united states... amistads problems go far deeper than such anachronisms as president martin van buren campaigning for re-election on a whistle-stop train tour (in 1840, candidates did not campaign), or people constantly talking about the impending civil war, which lay 20 years in the future."other reported inaccuracies include:

despite what the film suggests, the actual supreme court decision reversed district and circuit decrees regarding the africans' conveyance back to africa; they were to be deemed free, but the u.s. government could not take them back to africa, as they had arrived on american soil as free people.
the film version of adams' closing speech before the supreme court and the court's decision as read by justice joseph story bear no resemblance to the much longer historical versions; they are not even fair summaries.
during the scene depicting the destruction of the lomboko slave fortress by a royal navy schooner, the vessel's captain refers to another officer as "ensign". this rank has never been used by the royal navy.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
amistad received mainly positive reviews. on rotten tomatoes, the film received an approval rating of 77% based on reviews from 64 critics, with an average score of 6.9/10. its consensus reads: "heartfelt without resorting to preachiness, amistad tells an important story with engaging sensitivity and absorbing skill."susan wloszczyna of usa today summed up the feelings of many reviewers when she wrote: "as spielberg vehicles go, amistad  part mystery, action thriller, courtroom drama, even culture-clash comedy  lands between the disturbing lyricism of schindler's list and the storybook artificiality of the color purple." roger ebert awarded the film three out of four stars, writing: 

"amistad," like spielberg's "schindler's list," is [...] about the ways good men try to work realistically within an evil system to spare a few of its victims. [...] "schindler's list" works better as narrative because it is about a risky deception, while "amistad" is about the search for a truth that, if found, will be small consolation to the millions of existing slaves. as a result, the movie doesn't have the emotional charge of spielberg's earlier film  or of "the color purple," which moved me to tears. [...] what is most valuable about "amistad" is the way it provides faces and names for its african characters, whom the movies so often make into faceless victims.
in 2014, the movie was one of several discussed by noah berlatsky in the atlantic in an article concerning white savior narratives in film, calling it 'sanctimonious drivel.'morgan freeman is very proud of the movie: "i loved the film. i really did. i had a moment of err, during the killings. i thought that was a little over-wrought. but he (spielberg) wanted to make a point and i understood that."


=== box office ===
the film debuted at no. 5 on december 10, 1997, and earned $44,229,441 at the box office in the united states.


=== awards and honors ===
amistad was nominated for academy awards in four categories: best supporting actor (anthony hopkins), best original dramatic score (john williams), best cinematography (janusz kamiski), and best costume design (ruth e. carter).


== see also ==

list of films featuring slavery
supreme court of the united states in fiction
trial film


== footnotes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
amistad at imdb
amistad at allmovie
amistad at box office mojo
amistad at rotten tomatoesamistad at virtual history