an alligator named daisy is a 1955 british comedy film directed by j. lee thompson and starring donald sinden, jeannie carson, james robertson justice, diana dors, roland culver and stanley holloway.


== plot ==
returning from a cricket match in ireland, peter weston (sinden), an englishman, is left with a pet alligator by another passenger who abandons it to him. horrified, his first instinct is to get rid of it as soon as possible. however, he soon develops a bond with moira (carson), a young irishwoman, which appears to be centred almost entirely around the animal. he soon discovers that daisy is very tame and domesticated, and seems to be the way to moira's heart.
once back in london, weston struggles to keep daisy under control  as she upsets his family, loses him his job at a department store and imperils his relationship with his fiance vanessa (dors). he plans to get rid of daisy, but the police and a pet shop refuse to take her so he abandons her in regent's park, later returning with a sense of guilt to rescue her. owing to a mix-up, daisy is packed along with the rest of his luggage and accompanies him to his prospective father-in-law's country house. there, daisy escapes and causes mayhem, while the arrival of moira's "husband" produces a surprising outcome for all of them.


== cast ==
donald sinden  peter weston
jeannie carson  moira o'shannon
james robertson justice  sir james colbrooke
diana dors  vanessa colbrooke
roland culver  mr weston
stanley holloway  the general
avice landone  mrs weston
richard wattis  hoskins
stephen boyd  albert o'shannon
ernest thesiger  notcher (uncredited)
henry kendall  valet
michael shepley  the judge
wilfrid lawson  irishman (uncredited)
charles victor  sergeant (uncredited)
george moon  al (uncredited)
margaret rutherford  prudence croquet
joan hickson  piano customer (uncredited)
jimmy edwards  alligator owner (uncredited)
frankie howerd  comedian (uncredited)
george woodbridge  pc jorkins (uncredited)
colin freear - garage boy (uncredited)


== production ==
the film was based on a novel published in 1954. film rights were bought by raymond stross in november 1954. he wanted diana dors, janette scott and kenneth moore to star.filming took place at pinewood studios in may 1955. it was dors' third movie with thompson.


== critical reception ==
the tv guide wrote, "this very funny film has an excellent supporting cast." the new york times found that despite "a curiously cute bit by margaret rutherford, as a pet-shop owner who talks to the animals in their own "language."...the joke wears thin."


== references ==


== external links ==
an alligator named daisy at imdb
an alligator named daisy at bfi screenonline
an alligated named daisy at bfi
an alligator named daisy at tcmdb
an alligator named daisy at letterbox dvd