an inspector calls is a british 1954 film directed by guy hamilton and written for the screen by desmond davis. it is based upon the 1945 play an inspector calls by j.b. priestley. it stars alastair sim.


== plot ==
set in 1912, a dinner party held by the upper class birling family is interrupted by a man calling himself inspector poole, investigating the suicide of a lower-class girl eva smith whose death is linked to each family member.


== cast ==
alastair sim as inspector poole
jane wenham as eva smith
eileen moore as sheila birling
bryan forbes as eric birling
brian worth as gerald croft
olga lindo as sybil birling
arthur young as arthur birling
norman bird as foreman jones-collins
charles saynor as police sergeant arnold ransom
john welsh as mr. timmon: hat sales manager
barbara everest as mrs. lefson: charity committee woman
george woodbridge as stanley: fish & chips shop owner
george cole as conductor on tram
olwen brookes as miss frances
frances gowens as small girl


== production ==
an inspector calls was filmed at shepperton studios, shepperton, middlesex, england, under the auspices of the watergate productions ltd.in the original play, the inspector's name was inspector goole.although the play never shows eva smith, the film opens in flashbacks that show each member of the family's involvement in smith's life. the relationships between eva and gerald, and later, eric, are smoothed over in accordance with the censorship of the day. still, enough elements are retained to give the viewer a good idea of the depth of involvements.
in the play, eva is first sacked for being involved in a strike; in the film, she is simply sacked for suggesting that the wages requested were necessary to live on. similarly, in the play, sheila is trying on a dress when the incident with eva occurs in the shop; in the film, the incident is over a hat.
the film makes the inspector out to be more explicitly "supernatural" than does the play. in the play, he is ushered in by the maid, while in the film he simply appears suddenly in the dining room as if from nowhere, accompanied by an ominous chord in the background music. in the middle of the film, he inspects his pocket watch and asks eric to enter the room. he states he has just heard eric come through the door; but eerily he states this before eric does come through the door. likewise, at the end, when the family receives the phone call that the local police are on their way to question them, the inspector is supposedly in the study, but when the family checks to see if he is there, they find an empty chair and that he has gone.


== reception ==
c. a. lejeune, film critic of the observer, recommended the film; despite its lack of technical polish, its slow pace and often trite dialogue, she found it thought-provoking.


== references ==


== external links ==
an inspector calls (1954) at the british film institute
an inspector calls at allmovie
an inspector calls at imdb
an inspector calls (1954) at free films archive