anandam (english: happiness) is a 2001 indian telugu-language romance film, directed by srinu vaitla and starring jai akash and rekha vedavyas in the lead roles. the music of the film was composed by devi sri prasad. the film was a super hit and ran for 200 days. it was a  commercial and critical success of the time. this film made akash an overnight star of the telugu film industry. the film was remade in tamil as inidhu inidhu kaadhal inidhu and kannada as ananda, all three versions being produced by ramoji rao. 


== plot ==
kiran (akash) and aishwarya (rekha vedavyas) are neighbours since childhood and always fight with each other on trivial things. kiran hates her so much that he feels relieved when she moves to ooty along with her parents. there, aishwarya comes across an unopened greeting card addressed to deepika (tanu roy). she comes to know that deepika's family were the previous tenants in that home and tries to find out the whereabouts of deepika to hand over the greeting card. but she finds out that deepika committed suicide unwilling to marry the person chosen by her parents and as her plans of elopement failed as her boyfriend did not come to rescue her.
aishwarya feels bad for deepika and tries to leave the matter, but couldn't when she finds letters written by vamsi, deepika's boyfriend. she reads them and gets moved by the emotion in it. she decides to break the information of deepika's suicide to vamsi, but first, she writes a letter to him as deepika to prepare him for the bad news. on the other hand, vamsi was no more as he dies in an accident while coming to deepika to marry her. incidentally, kiran was vamsi's friend and receives the letter written by aishwarya. he too wants to prepare deepika slowly for bad news and write her back as vamsi. they continue exchanging letters for some more time and at last decide to break the news and arrange a meeting.
when they see each other instead of deepika and vamsi, they get shocked and slowly reveal the truth to each other. they both get impressed with each other for the sympathetic and competent handling of the sensitive matter. they move back to their places but start to having feelings for each other. slowly they express their emotions and become one.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack is composed by devi sri prasad. the soundtrack of the movie is released through mayuri audio.


== sequel ==
akash directed a tamil-language sequel to the film titled anandam arrambam in 2013. the film remains unreleased.


== references ==


== external links ==
anandam at imdb