to your eternity (japanese: , hepburn: fumetsu no anata e, lit. "to you, the immortal") is a japanese manga series written and illustrated by yoshitoki ima. it has been serialized in weekly shnen magazine since november 2016, with the individual chapters collected by kodansha into fifteen tankbon volumes as of april 2021. the story follows an immortal being, fushi, who arrives on the earth and takes the form of an abandoned eskimo boy and his wolf.
in north america, the manga has been licensed by kodansha usa for a digital and printed english release. ima was inspired to write the manga after her grandmother's death, aiming to write a story about survival and an immortal character who grows over time from an emotionless stone as a result of interacting with human beings. in contrast to her previous work, a silent voice, to your eternity is set focus on the cast's futures rather than past. an anime television series adaptation by brain's base premiered on april 12, 2021.
the manga has been well received in japan, earning multiple awards and selling multiple copies. the critical response to the series debut was positive based on the emotional focus on the eskimo and the wolf but critics often felt it was lackluster, especially compared to a silent voice. nevertheless, fushi's continuous character arc was praised while ima's artwork received positive feedback based on its detailed facial expressions and environments.


== plot ==
the manga follows a mysterious immortal being, known only as "the orb", sent to the earth with no emotions nor identity. the being is able to take on the shape of those around that leave a strong impression on him. starting off as a white orb, he takes the form of a rock, then a dying wolf. as a wolf, the being meets a boy living alone whom he mistakes from his late pet, johan. after the boy dies due to a major wound in his body, the wolf takes his form. the wolf travels the world over nonstop until he is adopted by a young girl named march who names him fushi. fushi is then forms of various beings, and acquiring new powers, such as the ability to create objects out of nothing, and resurrecting the dead. moreover, fushi starts becoming developing more human emotions across his journey allowing him to meet new people.


== characters ==
fushi ()
voiced by: reiji kawashima
march (, mchi)
voiced by: rie hikisaka
parona ()
voiced by: aya uchida
pioran ()
voiced by: rikako aikawa
hayase ()
voiced by: mitsuki saiga
the beholder (, kansatsu-sha)
voiced by: kenjiro tsuda


== production ==
manga artist yoshitoki ima conceived the title "to your eternity" after learning that her grandmother was going to pass away due to an illness. in the beginning, she only knew the "nuance" she wanted the title to have, but could not decide on an actual title. she chose  "to your eternity", her first idea, after her colleagues said it was appealing. the decision to give the manga a fantasy setting was because of the freedom she had to write most notably supernatural beings as well as multiple settings. she compares to your eternity to her other works, and says while a silent voice focuses on characters in the present confronting their past, to your eternity focuses on the future. she also mentions exploring the theme of death in mardock scramble, a silent voice and to your eternity. the character fushi originated from the ima's work in primary school, although the setting has changed multiple elements before the series started serialization. fushi was originally going to be female, but a colleague suggested a male protagonist in order to create a different appeal. ima wanted to make the protagonist neutral, and said she prefers neutral female characters. each volume cover represents a character's dream such as the first one which depicts the unnamed youth finding freedom.characters featured in the series are based on real life.  for example, pioran made ima think of her grandmother that had passed away. she said that she felt some guilt for having characters die in those ways. ima commented on fushi's growth over time and that, starting with its early portrayal as an animal, even eating food out of march's hand like an animal, which the author felt difficult to do. there are approximately 13 characters that are greatly affected by fushi and that the original title would have been "ash swords of 13 people" (13). when it comes to drawing, march is ima's favorite character due to her small height. furthermore, ima says she likes drawing children in confined places.the setting is based on the concept of the main character being "a boy who knows nothing". ima wanted the reader to find himself, like imm, in this situation where he does not know anything. it is for this reason that she did not make any character appear apart from the hero. a common theme portrayed in the manga is death and immortality, though the latter is something she does not want to show to the readers based on her own personal view. to reinforce this impression of the unknown, she decided to draw a white universe, this is how she obtained a snowy landscape. as the characters living in this snowy region are not part of an indigenous population, she decided she should not draw them as, for example, eskimos. for research, she watched several documentaries so that she could learn how to make the boy look like he is living in a world of "survival", with limited resources and skills. she had to think a lot about what was possible for him to create on his own and not. in balancing the characters, march was created to be talkative and balance the quiet ones. the manga presents the climate, disease and the bear as obstacles of the human will. ima elaborates that people have to live with these obstacles, and it is to learn how to overcome them that she put them on the scene.


=== adaptation ===
director masahiko murata expressed surprise when first reading the manga series, initially believing the eskimo would be the lead character rather than fushi. he felt the themes oida is approaching are thought-provoking which he found challenging as it is his work to express. murata stated that, as minor parts of the manga were changed, the anime will be loyal to the original printed version. he felt glad about directing the anime and thus wanted to attract the viewers' attention with it.in casting the actors reiji kawashima's voice quality is felt fitting for fushi from his point of view. when first hearing it, kawashima was a person who boldly challenged the voices of various roles that are changing, including wolves, so the director found him fitting. the observer played by kenjiro tsuda is a role such as a narrative part that is not so involved in the story due to murata's idea that tsuda's voice was "cool". the first episode only had two voice actors: kawashima and tsuda. the former expressed relief when working as he felt that tsuda was a friendly person. tsuda felt that kawashima was a passionate actor due to how early he appeared in each episode's recording session. kawashima felt his character to be exhausting to play based on his multiple experiences while tsuda thought fushi was too mysterious.


== media ==


=== manga ===

yoshitoki ima debuted to your eternity in issue #50 of kodansha's shnen manga magazine weekly shnen magazine on november 9, 2016. the manga was announced on may 23, 2016. it is ima's second series in weekly shnen magazine; her first series was the critically acclaimed a silent voice. the series' first arc finished on december 4, 2019, while the second arc started on january 22, 2020.on  january 17, 2017, kodansha usa announced that they would digitally publish the first ten chapters of the series on various digital platforms. thereafter, they will publish the manga's new chapters simultaneously  with the japanese release. the first printed volume in north america was released on october 31, 2017.


=== anime ===

on january 8, 2020, kodansha announced that the manga would receive an anime television series adaptation to air on nhk educational tv. the 20-episode series is animated by brain's base and directed by masahiko murata, with shinz fujita handling series composition, and koji yabuno designing the characters, and ryo kawasaki composing the series' music. originally scheduled to premiere in october 2020, the series was delayed to april 12, 2021 due to the covid-19 pandemic, and will run for 20 episodes. crunchyroll has licensed the anime for streaming outside of asia. medialink has also acquired the series to stream under its ani-one branding. utada hikaru performed the series' opening theme song "pink blood", while masashi hamauzu composes the ending theme song, "mediator".


== reception ==
the first collected volume of the series sold 29,288 copies, ranking number 17 on the weekly oricon manga chart. its second volume ranked number 34, selling 22,565 copies in its first week, while its third debuted at number 41 with 20,445 copies sold.the manga was nominated for the 11th edition of the manga taish awards in 2018 and it managed to gain a total of 47 points. in 2018 oima won at french japan expo the daruma de la meilleure nouvelle srie for to your eternity. in may 2019, it won the award for best shnen manga at the 43rd annual kodansha manga awards, alongside the quintessential quintuplets. in both 2018 and 2019, anime news network listed as one of the best series for young readers. the first five volumes were listed by the american library association as one of the best mangas written for a young audience in 2019.the manga's narrative and setting have been praised by otaku usa due to its multiple fantasy elements provided in each chapter as well as the drama involving the characters aiming to survive. however, he felt the story provided in the first volume lacked the emotional impact from the previous mangaka's work, a silent voice. uk anime network gave the first volume a 10 out of 10, impressed by "thought-provoking read, which examines humanity from a distance - it's one of those stories that works exceptionally well in the manga environment". anime uk news was engaged by the manga's first chapter based on the characterization of the unnamed eskimo rather than fushi. on the other hand, fantasy mundo claimed that to your enternity might move the readers ever since the beginning due to how mushi interacts with humans and becomes able to perform new feats or express emotions more clearly the more he bonds with them. manga mexico noted that the narrative seemed based on the slice of life genre while providing multiple ideas as well for a survival manga.as the manga progressed, the fandom post praised fushi's character arc as he was close to acting like a human rather in contrast to his nearly emotionless introduction and felt the tragic tone presented in the story was effective to the him. in a later volume, the same writer enjoyed the way the morality was presented and how fushi's life became far sadder due to him losing friends, making him "becoming a living legend" due to how active he became. manga news also liked how the manga progressed as it introduces new characters who befriend fushi, adding more variety for each story arc as the fushi's allies are distinctive and have interesting actions. the reviewer furthermore enjoyed the series' time-skips as fushi's immortality allows him to blend in with the new more modern scenarios.the critical response to the artwork was mostly positive. anime uk news praised the way ima drew the pages, giving detailed looks the characters have and the way settings are presented. manga mexico writer tania vila praised the artwork like anime uk news especially in later chapters of the first volume. fantasy mundo noted that the drawing helped to further detail the characters and improve the emotional value. the fandom post felt that the artwork "is light on textures and right with detailed backgrounds once the story moves from the snowfields to the forest" and felt wildlife was often drawn strange. uk anime network praised the way backgrounds are detailed and the way the author builds the characters' emotions, provoking the readers into having strong feelings for them.


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
to your eternity at weekly shnen magazine (in japanese)
to your eternity at kodansha usa
to your eternity (manga) at anime news network's encyclopedia