anbe vaa (transl.come, my love) is a 2005 indian tamil-language film directed by k. selva bharathy. the film features newcomer thendral, sridevika and vivek in the lead roles, with m. s. viswanathan, m. n. rajam, rekha, k. deepa arunachalam and c. duraipandian playing supporting roles. the film, produced by jayanthi krishnamoorthy, had musical score by d. imman. the film was released on 18 november 2005 to mixed reviews. this film was vivek's 150th film.


== plot ==
in chennai, karthik (thendral) is a carefree art college student who spends his time drinking and enjoying with his friends and his talkative uncle nandha (vivek). karthik is the son of a rich heiress (rekha). after finishing his studies, his mother urges to marry someone or to work in their company but karthik leaves his home and takes his uncle with him. unable to find a place to stay, they return home. karthik who wants to avoid the responsibility of a job accepts for an arranged marriage. in madurai, priya has finished her studies and returns to her native village. she also accepts for an arranged marriage to escape from her dead-end life in a small village. karthik and his family come to the village to see the potential bride priya. karthik and priya fall in love at first sight, accept to get married and they marry with the blessings of their families. after the marriage, nandha tells priya that karthik is heavily dependent on him, stubborn and asks her to take care of him from now on. whereas priya's family takes promises from nandha to not make her cry or else they would teach him a lesson.
karthik and priya move in a flat in chennai. the young couple decides to have enough space and privacy in their relationship but karthik's mother urges priya to be more intrusive towards karthik. priya being a disciplined person is bothered by the carelessness of karthik. in one week, a dispute arises between the two as they find that they are not compatible. they split up and priya returns to her village.
nandha then convinces priya to come back home and nandha tries his best to unite the young couple. priya decides to seduce her husband in different ways. she tries to capitalise on her glamour and her culinary skills, but both her attempts fail miserably. priya and karthik then start to annoy each other. one day, things get out of control and a furious karthik threatens her with a knife and priya calls the police. the police arrest karthik and nandha tries to change priya's mind but she slaps him. after this incident, karthik applies for divorce. in an attempt to save their marriage, nandha sends the couple attending marriage counselling sessions but they are hell-bent on getting a divorce. priya's family have to resort to the rowdy gaja (karate raja) to speed up the divorce process. at the 60th wedding anniversary of priya's grandparents (m. s. viswanathan and m. n. rajam), the old couple and nandha have an emotional speech changing priya's negative thoughts about marriage and she begs her grandparents for forgiveness for hurting their feelings. gaja who falls in love with priya kidnaps her and nandha urges karthik to save her. during the fight, nandha is stabbed by a henchman and he is later saved at the hospital. karthik too feels bad for hurting the feelings of his family. the couple puts their egos aside and decides to unite for the benefit of all.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by d. imman.


== reception ==
sify wrote, "anbe vaa depends largely on viveks scintillating comedy show. his antics spice up the proceedings and the punch lines make you smile. sreedevika is not bad for a first-timer. the film drags towards the end and music of d.imman is a big let down. on the whole, this selvabharathy directed film is funny in parts thanks to the one-man laugh brigade called vivek." balaji balasubramaniam wrote, "anbe vaa is one of those movies that benefits from low expectations. the mug of its debutant hero doesn't inspire much confidence and its only vivek's name on the credits that gives the film some credibility. but the movie avoids the easy route(of setting the movie in a college and loading the movie with vulgarity) that most movies with newcomers take and aims higher. it doesn't reach that high in the end but the effort deserves some credit."


== references ==