andaz (transl.style) is a 1994 indian hindi action comedy film directed by david dhawan, starring anil kapoor, juhi chawla, karishma kapoor and kader khan. other cast members include raj babbar, shakti kapoor, satish kaushik, ishrat ali, mahesh anand, vikas anand and tej sapru. it is a remake of 1992 tamil film sundara kandam starring k. bhagyaraj and bhanupriya.


== plot ==
ajay (anil kapoor) an intelligent ex-student of the s. t. school is appointed in the same school as a teacher. jaya (karisma kapoor), who studies in his class harasses him by playing mischievous pranks. ajay's refusal to enter into a romantic relationship with jaya upsets her. she challenges him that she will one day become his wife. in a hurry he marries saraswati (juhi chawla), an illiterate orphan girl. jaya befriends saraswati by teaching her everything from cooking to reading and writing. one day, some terrorists attack the school and take the children as hostages. ajay, jaya and all are trapped. in between jaya gives her life to save ajay, there saraswati reveals that she knows about jaya's love for ajay and asks ajay to marry her on the spot by putting a mangalsutra around her neck. jaya refuses saying that she will come back in their lives again, this time as ajay's and saraswati's daughter. jaya dies at the end of the film.


== cast ==
anil kapoor as ajay kumar
juhi chawla as saraswati
karisma kapoor as jaya
raj babbar as captain
mahesh anand as chote, terrorist
tej sapru as bhola,terrorist
govind namdev as terrorist
vishwajeet pradhan as terrorist
kader khan as principal
shakti kapoor as shagun
kunika as shobha teacher
satish kaushik as panipuri sharma
dina pathak as dadi in photo frame
himani shivpuri as panipuri's wife
ishrat ali as an indian army officer
vikas anand as army officer and father of jaya
harish patel as minister
subbiraj as col. anand viraj. (uncredited role) (killed at beginning of movie)
deven bhojani as ajay,student
vinay sapru as govind,student
javed hyder as chunky pandey,student


== soundtrack ==
the music is scored by bappi lahiri, with lyrics by indeevar and notable singers kumar sanu, abhijeet bhattacharya, udit narayan, kavita krishnamurthy, alka yagnik, vinod rathod, sadhana sargam and sudesh bhosle.


== references ==


== external links ==
andaz at imdb