andhhagadu (transl. blind handsome man) is a 2017 telugu-language comedy thriller film, produced by sunkara ramabrahmam on ak entertainments pvt ltd banner and directed by veligonda srinivas. starring raj tarun, hebah patel and rajendra prasad  and music composed by shekar chandra. this movie was declared hit at box-office. the movie was remade in odia in 2018 as sriman surdas starring babushan and bhumika.


== plot ==
gautham (raj tarun) an orphan blinded youngster who is in search of an eye donor and a soulmate. once he falls for an eye specialist dr. netra (hebah patel) and starts inspiring her by acting as normal. after a few comic incidents, netra also loves him but when she discovers the reality, she dumps him. heartbroken gautham decides to love a girl finer than her. meanwhile, netra arranges a donor for gautham and within no time he regains his eyesight. thereafter, everyday gautham gets some mysterious dreams. now gautham again falls for netra only, without knowing her identity even she too pretends as dumb as he may recognize her voice. later gautham realizes the truth when the rift erases between them. suddenly, one day, a person ranjith kulkarni (rajendra prasad) enters into gautham's life claiming as netra's father and keeps few funny tests to him such as conducting all medical tests, nonstop 20 rounds in the ground and removing breaks from the vehicle of assistant commissioner dharma (sayaji shinde). right now, he invites gautham to his house for finalizing the match where surprisingly, gautham spots dharma as netra's father and he affirms the fact. here as a flabbergast, netra reveals that ranjith kulkarni is passed away 2 months ago and his eyes are only transplanted to him. soon, gautham realizes it as ranjith kulkarni's soul. now kulkarni divulges his past that he is a sincere journalist, who has been slaughtered by a dreadful goon pantham babji (raja ravindra). hereupon, he wants to take avenge through gautham for which he refuses. there onwards, kulkarni makes gautham's life miserable by creating enmity with babji. gautham narrates the entire story to an eye specialist dr. ashish (ashish vidyarthi) and requests him to remove his eyes. fortunately, ashish is a close friend of dharma who convinces him that whatever gautham is stating as fact. at that point in time, ashish learns ranjith kulkarni as a businessman, immediately he rushes gautham's residence and understands his play. at present, he seeks gautham for actuality then he narrates the real past. in his childhood, at the blind school, he used to have 3 friends who went to eye transplants. on their way back, they witness a murder made by pantham babji for which he killed them. hence, he has drawn up this revenge scheme, eventually, babji also detects it and kidnaps netra. at last, gautham eliminates babji in the name of kulkarni. finally, gautham marries netra, on their first night, surprisingly, kulkarni's soul really appears and frightens him to help in taking his true vengeance.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music composed by shekar chandra. music released on aditya music company.


== references ==


== external links ==
andhhagadu at imdb