andy hardy comes home is a 1958 comedy film directed by howard w. koch. it is the 16th and final film in the andy hardy series, with mickey rooney reprising his signature role. it was made 12 years after the previous hardy film, and was an attempt to revive what had once been an enormously popular series. however, the film fell short of box office projections and the series did not resume.


== plot ==
returning to his hometown of carvel after several years' absence, andrew "andy" hardy, now a high-flying west coast lawyer, reminiscences (in flashbacks to earlier films) about his past. he also reconnects with his mother, aunt, sister, and nephew jimmy as he attempts to convince the skeptical townsfolk to let his company build a factory there.
when his plan to buy land from his old friend beezy runs into difficulty, andy brings his wife, jane, and two children, andy jr. and cricket, to bolster his resolve, and to help him live up to the lessons instilled in him by his late father.
while all seems lost, the closing moments reposition the resurrected series for a new set of andy hardy films, but these never materialized.


== cast ==


== production ==
songwriter robert donley and journalist edward hushting wrote an original andy hardy synopsis on speculation and brought it to rooney's agent, red doff. he showed it to rooney, who was enthusiastic, and they pitched the project to metro-goldwyn-mayer as a co-production with rooney's own company, fryman enterprises. the studio, then under the control of joseph vogel, agreed to make the film."we feel it's time for another hardy picture", said doff. "time for a good, warm, wholesome family comedy  no violence, no monsters, no sex! there are millions who have seen and loved the hardys  and who would like to see them again. and there are millions who never saw them on the big screen, but who are being presold by seeing them on tv. people like things nostalgic. we believe they'll be curious to see a re-creation of what they loved 15 and 20 years ago."lewis stone, who had played the beloved judge hardy in the earlier films, had died in 1953, and his character's passing was noted in the film. fay holden, sara haden, and cecilia parker all reprised their roles. (the latter had been mostly retired since the series ended, devoting herself to raising her children).mickey rooney tried to persuade ann rutherford to return as polly benedict, andy's on-and-off sweetheart in most of the original movies, so the two characters could be a married couple, but rutherford's salary demands were too high, and the character was written out. andy's wife in the film, jane (played by patricia breslin), had no prior connection to the town of carvel.
in line with mgm's practice of introducing studio contract players in the series, contractee pat cawley was given a role.the role of andy hardy jr. was played by rooney's real-life son, teddy.
filming started on 7 may 1958.


== reception ==
according to mgm records, the movie earned $400,000 in the us and canada and $210,000 elsewhere, making a loss to the studio of $5,000.before the film was released, hutshing and donley worked on a sequel about andy hardy as a judge called andy hardy carries on. there was also some talk of an andy hardy tv series. in the early 1960s, a pilot was shot for a prospective andy hardy sitcom for nbc, with a totally different cast and with the character of judge hardy returning, but nbc did not pick it up as a series.


== see also ==
list of american films of 1958


== references ==


== external links ==
andy hardy comes home at imdb 
andy hardy comes home at allmovie 
andy hardy comes home at the tcm movie database
andy hardy comes home at the american film institute catalog 
andy hardy comes home at andy hardy films