anjaam (english: consequence) is a 1994 indian hindi psychological thriller film directed by rahul rawail. it stars madhuri dixit, shah rukh khan, tinnu anand, johnny lever, kalpana iyer, himani shivpuri, sudha chandran, beena, and kiran kumar, with a guest appearance by deepak tijori. the film's music was composed by anand-milind, with lyrics written by sameer. the film is about the consequences (anjaam) of the slightest mistake and how it can ruin your whole life. it also focuses on the atrocities committed against women. 
this was the first time that madhuri dixit and shah rukh khan were paired together. khan and dixit were praised for their respective performances. madhuri dixit earned a filmfare best actress nomination for her role, but won the award for her performance in hum aapke hain koun..!. khan was again featured in a negative role; he received the filmfare best villain award for his performance. he was nominated for the same award the previous year for his performance in yash chopra's darr. khan has bought the rights to this film under his banner, red chillies entertainment.


== plot ==
shivani chopra (madhuri dixit) is an air hostess for air india. she meets vijay agnihotri (shahrukh khan), a wealthy industrialist. he instantly falls in love, but she shows no interest in him. this does not stop vijay and he continues to pursue her, only to be rejected every time. vijay informs his mother that he intends to marry shivani. when they approach shivani's family for her hand in marriage, they see that shivani is marrying ashok, an air india pilot (deepak tijori). vijay is heartbroken  shocked and disspointed while shivani and ashok get posted right after their wedding and move to america.
four years later, vijay still cannot forget shivani and turns down all the marriage proposals brought by his mother. shivani and ashok now have a daughter named pinky. vijay befriends ashok in hopes of getting closer to shivani. ashok is unaware of vijay's intentions and does not believe shivani when she tries to convince him of vijay's true face. one day, ashok kicks shivani out after they have an argument. vijay witnesses this and severely beats him. when ashok is being treated in the hospital, vijay removes his oxygen mask, thereby killing him. shivani attempts to convince the police that vijay is responsible for ashok's death. however, vijay bribes his friend, inspector arjun singh, to provide an alibi, and is not charged. vijay then begs shivani to say she loves him. when she refuses, he frames shivani for his attempted murder and she is sentenced to three years in prison. 
pinky is placed in the care of shivani's sister and drunkard brother-in-law mohanlal (tinnu anand), who treats pinky poorly. one day, mohanlal tells his wife to remove pinky from the house and she refuses. in response, mohanlal kicks both shivani's sister and pinky out. vijay accidentally kills shivani's sister and daughter by running his car over them. shivani learns about their deaths and realises vijay is the one who killed them. she decides to go to any length to avenge her family. in an attempt to escape from prison, she makes a complaint about the brutality of her prison guard but her plea is ignored. in prison, she learns that she is pregnant with ashok's child. when the prison guard learns that shivani complained, she gives her a severe beating, which causes her to have a miscarriage. shivani kills the prison guard by dragging her to the gallows and hanging her. as there is no evidence, she is not convicted for it.
three years later, shivani is released from prison. first, she kills mohanlal by choking him with rupee notes and chewing off a significant amount of flesh from his arm. inspector singh suspects shivani for the murder. while shivani is mourning her daughter, singh steps right on her grave to rudely intercept her. he chases her and attempts to rape her in a barn, but shivani overpowers him and sets the barn on fire, leaving him to die. she learns that vijay has moved to tikamgarh. she goes to work at a hospital for the mentally ill and finds vijay there; he had become paralyzed in the car accident after running over shivani's family. she volunteers to rehabilitate him. when cured, vijay begs shivani once again to say she loves him. shivani embraces him before stabbing him. she confesses that she nursed him to health for one purpose: to kill him, as it is a sin to kill an incapacitated person who cannot defend himself. in their scuffle, they end up dangling from a cliff with vijay hanging onto shivani's foot. vijay says that if he falls to his death, he shall take shivani with him. deciding that it is more important for vijay to die than for her to live, shivani lets go, causing both of them to fall to their deaths.


== cast ==
madhuri dixit as shivani chopra
shah rukh khan as vijay agnihotri
deepak tijori as ashok chopra, shivani's husband
tinnu anand as mohanlal, shivani's brother-in-law
sudha chandran as padma mohan, shivani's sister
beena as padma agnigotri, vijay's mother
johnny lever as champa chameli
kalpana iyer as prison warden
himani shivpuri as nisha, shivani's friend and confidant in prison
kiran kumar as inspector arjun singhrumi jafri
darshan sandher
pradeep suri
baby gazala as pinky chopra, ashok and vijay shivani's daughter
kamal deep
ghanshyam
birbal
jugnu


== production ==
originally, the film was titled majnu ki deewangi. this marked the first of many collaborations between dixit and khan.


== soundtrack ==
rakesh budhu of planet bollywood gave the album 7.5 stars stating, "anjaam's tunes are overall a mixed fare but the songs that were sweet and melodious were enough to project the soundtrack to higher standards. the only song that is sung by abhijeet in this album, "badi mushkil hai", is considered one of the most melodious songs till date".


=== track listing ===


== awards and nominations ==


== references ==


== external links ==
anjaam at imdb