ankhiyon ke jharokhon se (hindi:    , lit.'through the eyelashes') is a 1978 indian hindi language drama film, starring ranjeeta and sachin and directed by hiren nag. it was produced and distributed by rajshri productions and showcased music by ravindra jain. in the film, college competitors miss lily and mr. arun gradually fall in love and are about to marry with everyone's blessings, but except the god !the film was a blockbuster at box office; it earned 4.5 times of its budget; it was 18th highest grossing movie of india in 1978. it was second most popular movie of 1978 after don, its title song was number one song of 1978 which is considered one of the best romantic songs in india. this movie is ranked third in the category: "10 finest bollywood romantic movies till 2022", and second in the category: "6 best cancerous movies", the film was shot in, bombay and other locations in india.


== plot ==
arun (sachin), the son of a barrister, and self-proclaimed prince of the male students finds his pride and huge ego crushed when he stands second in the terminal examination. he loses to lily fernandes (ranjeeta), the simple and modest daughter of an ordinary nurse in a private nursing home. arun takes this as a defeat, who then decides to nurse a personal vendetta to try and crush lily's growing popularity in school. lily, however, tolerates him and his friends' remarks and sarcasm as she bears no grudge against him.
as time goes on, they gradually discover the basic qualities of their opponents, one becoming the admirer of the other. they visit beautiful places together on weekends to get to know each other better. lily's mother is the first person to notice the love blossoming between her daughter and arun. she is worried, because even though arun is madly in love with her daughter, social status has to be considered. despite this, arun's father approves and presents a proposal to lily's mother to allow their children to marry.
when everything is going well, lily falls ill and is discovered to have leukemia. everyone tries to save the girl, and lily and arun act as if nothing was wrong. everything seems fine for a while, but lily's condition grows worse. she dies in arun's arms as she makes him promise to rise in life so that she would be at peace.
the film was shot in bhavans college, andheri w, mumbai


== cast ==
sachin pilgaonkar as arun prakash mathur
ranjeeta kaur as lily fernandes
madan puri as arun's father
iftekhar as dr. pradhan
urmila bhatt as ruby fernandes
harindranath chattopadhyay as mr. rodrigues
master raju


== soundtrack ==
ravindra jain composed the music and wrote the songs for this movie. the songs have been quite popular, especially the title song, 	"ankhiyon ke jharokhon se".  ravindra jain was nominated for filmfare awards in two categories for this song, namely, best lyricist and best musician.


== sequel ==
in 2011 rajshri productions roped in the star pair of their 1978 film -sachin pilgaonkar and ranjeeta kaur to produce a sequel for ankhiyon ke jharokhon se. the sequel was called jaana pehchana and showcased arun's life after lilys death. ranjeeta kaur portrayed a new character who is a look-alike of lily. the film was released on 16 september 2011.


== reception ==
the film was nominated for best actress, best film, and best direction at the 1978 filmfare awards. ranjeeta's poignant portrayal of the character was critically acclaimed.


== references ==


== external links ==
ankhiyon ke jharonkhon se at imdb