anna bond (transl.brother bond) is a 2012 kannada romantic action film written and directed by duniya soori.  produced by parvathamma rajkumar, it stars puneeth rajkumar, nidhi subbaiah and priyamani in the lead roles and jackie shroff in a negative role. the movie was released on 1 may 2012. v. harikrishna was the music director for the film. the film follows bond ravi, a karate champ, as he valiantly searches for charlie, a precarious rival, with his sidekick, chapathi babu, so as to rescue his ladylove meera.
anna bond opened to lacklustre reviews. it was mentioned on "the most disappointing kannada films of 2012" list by rediff, and got a thumbs down from critics.


== plot ==
bond ravi (puneeth rajkumar) is a generous guy, who has the tendency of helping others. he is a karate champ who works in a medical camp of singapore. he meets meera (priyamani) on a bus and falls in love with her charm. one day, meera visits the same village where bond ravi lives to make a documentary film. she stays with her friend divya (nidhi subbaiah).
love with meera increases for ravi. when meera is about to leave the village, she tells him to make something big in life. ravi, along with chapathi babu (rangayana raghu), leaves his village. on the way he meets a military guy, chandrakanth (avinash), who mistakes the identity of bond ravi in the forest.the military guy has come to treat the pain of an army official, chandrakanth. now, a sudden shoot begins from charlie (jackie shroff). bond ravi helps chandrakanth in this place.
a dreaded personality and drug mafia are looking for his daughter, who thinks his daughter is with chandrakanth.
next part of the movie is the revenge story of charlie on bond ravi. charlie on hunting for his daughter kills his daughter, divya. chandrakanths daughter meera comes under the custody of charlie as a part of revenge. the remaining movie revolves around the escape of meera from charlie, which is a great task for bond ravi.


== cast ==
puneeth rajkumar as bond ravi alias anna bond
nidhi subbaiah as divya
priyamani as meera
jackie shroff as charlie
rangayana raghu as chapathi babu
avinash as major chandrakanth
balu nagendra as bala
petrol prasanna as prasanna
chi. guru dutt as david
john kokken as john mathew
sathish ninasam as surya honalkere, film director
achyuth kumar
v. manohar as singapore chandrappa
honnavalli krishna
apoorva
shashikala
vidya murthy
jayashree raj
varsha krishnan
yamuna murthy
b. k. shivaram
rajashekhar kadamba
tumkur mohan
prashanth siddi
raj kumar
rockline sudhakar


== production ==


=== development ===
anna bond is the second puneeth rajkumar movie with duniya soori after the acclaimed and highly successful 2010 film jackie. the film was officially launched on 7 october 2011, a day after the release of puneet's film paramathma, and filming commenced on 10 october. being a big budget film, it is said to have a story with a revolutionary concept, but with the entertainment quotient intact and a lot of graphics to support its narration.it is the 80th film of kannada thespian dr. rajkumar's production unit, poornima enterprises. the technical team was the same one that worked for jackie, including v. harikrishna for music, shashidhar adapa for art, sathya hegde for cinematography and imran sardhariya for choreography. there were five songs, with lyrics penned by yogaraj bhat, jayanth kaikini and kaviraj.


=== filming ===
the film was shot in bangalore, coorg and kanakapura. the film unit also shot two songs in spain among the fanfare of locals to watch the song and dance.


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by v. harikrishna and released by anand audio video.


== critical reception ==
the film received generally unfavourable reviews from critics.
the new indian express wrote "anna bond is filled with a powerful action, good screenplay and crisp dialogues with lesser importance given to the storyline. it is indeed another masala flick in which puneeth makes his presence felt in almost every frame with his bulky body and eye-popping action sequences."the times of india gave the film 3.5 stars on 5 calling it the best gift in 2012 for puneet fans. it was further mentioned that director suri had chosen good action stuff with a romantic touch, with puneet rajkumar at his best. the first half of the film was praised for its neat narration the latter half was lauded for the action sequences.sify gave 2.5 stars saying that the film is not even a 'paisa vasool' masala entertainer but a boring action movie.srikanth srinivasa of rediff on a review made on 2 may 2012 gave 2.5 stars on 5 mentioning that anna bond is strictly for puneet fans. he also criticised the act of glorifying violence in the film.news 18 gave the film 2.5 stars on 5 calling anna bond a boring film. the film received criticism for its weak screenplay and narrative structure while the action and song sequences, background score, cinematography and puneet's dialogue delivery received great praise.shruthi i. l. of dna wrote "watch anna bond if you are a puneet rajkumar fan!" and gave 2 stars.
b. s. srivani of deccan herald gave a negative review and criticised it for glorifying vulgar violence.indiaglitz gave the film a score of 6.5 on 10 calling it a paisa vasool entertainer and a film for action film lovers. music director v. harikrishna and cinematographer sathya hegde received praise for their work.chitraloka called the film a mixed bag of sorts appreciating the technical prowness, musical score, choreography, cinematography and action sequences while criticising suri's screenplay.bangalore mirror praised the camerawork and musical score while criticising the flimsy storyline and the violence and ghore embedded in the plot. it was referred to as a tailor-made film for puneet fans and was compared to the 2009 puneeth film raaj.according to the hindu, "the much-awaited anna bond lives up to expectations on at least one count. it satiates puneet rajkumar fans with thrilling actions, lavish dances, picturesque locations and the star's omnipresence. but it disappoints those who expect suri'a signature style." it was further pointed out that the film was hero centric rather than director centric and is an example of a creative director losing confidence in himself and taking the much-trodden commercial path.


== accolades ==


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
anna bond at imdb