another gay movie is a 2006 american romantic comedy film directed by todd stephens. it follows four gay friends, andy, jarod, nico and griff, who vow upon graduating high school that they will all lose their "anal virginity" before their friend's labor day party. the film takes content from the 1999 teen comedy american pie. a sequel, another gay sequel: gays gone wild!, was released in 2008.


== plot ==
the story centers around four gay friends who have recently graduated from san torum high school. andy (michael carbonaro) is an awkward, sex-crazed character who frequently masturbates with his mother's fruits and vegetables. jarod (jonathan chase) is a handsome and fit jock who is quite insecure. griff (mitch morris) is a nerdy, well-dressed guy who is secretly in love with jarod. nico (jonah blechman) is the most flamboyant, outgoing, and effeminate of the group. the four of them decide to make a pact to have sex by the end of the summer. each boy proceeds to pursue sex in different ways, with both tragic and comedic results. nico tries to secure an online date with a man named ryder (matthew rush), but ends up with the grandfather (george marcy) of their lesbian friend muffler. jarod seeks out fellow jocks, including  a baseball pitcher named beau (james getzlaff), while griff tries to earn the affection of angel (darryl stephens), a male stripper; jarod and griff leave these men to have sex with each other instead, because they are in love. andy, having failed to seduce his long-time crush, his math teacher, mr. puckov (graham norton), has a threesome with the rejected beau and angel. much of the humor comes from how awkward each boy is at romance and how naive they are about sex. each plot backfires horribly, until the boys finally begin to change their attitudes towards sex at the end of the film.


== cast ==
michael carbonaro as andy wilson
jonah blechman as nico hunter
jonathan chase as jarod
mitch morris as griff
ashlie atkinson as dawn muffler
scott thompson as mr. wilson
graham norton as mr. puckov
stephanie mcvay as bonnie hunter
lypsinka as mrs. wilson
james getzlaff as beau
darryl stephens as angel
richard hatch as himself
george marcy as grandpa muffler
megan saraceni as mini-muff
saudia mills as muffler acquaintance
andersen gabrych as tyler
angela oh as tiki
joanna leeds as daisy
matthew rush as ryder
mink stole (deleted scenes) as sloppi seconds


== production ==
todd stephens' previous work revolved around gay teens, like edge of seventeen and gypsy 83. the film was a result of stephens difficulty in securing distribution of gypsy 83 because the film was not "gay" enough. stephens said "i was really angry when i wrote it. very frustrated. and another gay movie's what came out." actor jonah blechman initially refused the script, but became intrigued by his own shock to stephens' script that he decided to join the project as the executive producer.


== release and reception ==
on april 29, 2006, the film had its premier at lowes village east in new york. the film grossed $745,327 at the box office on a $500,000 budget.tirdad derakhshani of the philadelphia inquirer described the film as "an unapologetic, un-p.c., in-your-face gay take on american pie." kyle buchanan of the advocate reflected the positive impact of the film as a "...parody that felt necessary. arriving during the heyday of project runway and the ellen degeneres show, the film came as both confirmation of gay people's mainstream status and a built-in corrective to it." the film was not reviewed favorably by ann hornaday of the washington post, who described the film as a painful derivative of the gross-out teen comedy. ed blank said the campy vulgarity of the film caters to a niche audience, but the film "delivers an abominable ensemble performance in an unplayable script".


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
another gay movie at imdb
another gay movie at allmovie
another gay movie at box office mojo
another gay movie at rotten tomatoes