anuvahood is a 2011 british urban comedy film directed by adam deacon, who also plays the film's lead character. it also stars paul kaye, wil johnson, ollie barbieri, femi oyeniran, jocelyn jee esien, and ashley walters. critics of the film received it negatively; although it had a strong box-office opening. the film released worldwide on 18 march 2011.
anuvahood is a parody of films in the vein of urban films such as kidulthood, adulthood, and shank, all of which deacon starred in.


== plot ==
the story follows kenneth (adam deacon) who likes to call himself "k". he has an ambition of becoming a grime mc, and has already created his debut mixtape, feel the pain. however, nobody has bought a single copy and kenneth works, for now, at local supermarket laimsbury's to help pay his family's rent. when his boss insults him at work for trying to be a rapper, he quits and his mother berates him for failing to pay the house rent and his family is soon threatened by bailiffs.
kenneth cannot take seeing his mother hassled by the bailiffs, so he begins to sell illegal drugs with his friends bookie (femi oyeniran), enrique (ollie barbieri), lesoi (michael vu), and tj (jazzie zonzolo). when local badman tyrone (richie campbell) investigates kenneth, he steals kenneth's and his friends' accessories. his friends leave him and his family do not support him, so kenneth slyly breaks into tyrone's house to steal back his stuff.
while tyrone cheats on his baby's mother in the other room, kenneth manages to steal everyone's stuff back, but tyrone finds out and comes after him. tyrone attacks him, and his friends try to help him, but tyrone manages to scare them away, making it a one-on-one fight. kenneth shockingly fights back and takes tyrone down.
after the humiliation, tyrone's boss arrives and witnesses tyrone hitting kids, therefore sacks him and insults him in front of the entire hood. but to make matters worse, tyrone's baby's mother's brother appears on the scene to punish him further for cheating on his sister, and tyrone flees in humiliation.
kenneth gets his job back at laimsbury's and helps pay his family's rent.


== cast ==


== sequel ==
in december 2016, adam deacon teased the possibility of a sequel. he tweeted the news which read "happy to say it's on its way". although not much had been said about the sequel in a while, deacon confirmed in january 2018 that he'd be returning with co-star and writer buddies jazzie zonzolo and michael vu, as well as announcing that the sequel is set to be title sumotherhood. adam deacon also hosted the anuvahood: the sequel show at project romford in promotion of the upcoming release.


== see also ==
list of hood films


== references ==


== external links ==
anuvahood at imdb
official site