anveshana (transl.exploration) is a 1985 indian telugu-language suspense thriller film directed by vamsy, starring karthik, bhanupriya, kaikala satyanarayana and sarath babu with music composed by ilaiyaraaja. the story revolves around an ornithologist and a police officer coming to a forest and trying to solve the mystery of a series of killings, allegedly by a man-eating tiger.
the film received positive response for its screenplay, performances and music attaining cult classic status. the film was also dubbed in tamil as paadum paravaigal in 1988.


== plot ==
mr. rao (sathyanarayana) has a dream of publishing a book on birds and the origin of music from their sounds. pandu (rallapalli) works as his driver. they stay in a forest house and prepare the thesis for the same. he calls his friend's daughter hema (bhanupriya) from a city and appoints her to write the book. james (sarath babu) is a forest ranger investigating the case of a man-eater tiger in that area. after she comes, rao's manager ghokale is brutally killed in the forest, allegedly by a tiger. rao had to appoint another manager amar (karthik) for assisting his work. after he comes, a bullock cart owner suranna is also killed in the forest, supposedly by a tiger.
it is revealed that amar is actually a police officer in disguise who comes to investigate the serial killings in the forest. when suranna dies, he follows the footprints of the tiger and finds out that they actually belong to a human. he suspects the murders are well planned by a criminal. he also came to know that the victims were actually following hema when she was wandering in the forest. he seeks the help of hema in solving the case, to which she agrees. how they find the killer forms the rest of the story.


== cast ==
karthik as amar
bhanupriya as hema
kaikala satyanarayana as rao
rallapalli as paandu
sarath babu as james, range officer
subhalekha sudhakar as chantigadu, mentally challenged
mallikharjunarao as puliraju, village president
y. vijaya, wife of puli raju
viswanatham as sooranna
ponni as sumathi


== production ==
this is the third film for vamsy as a director after manchu pallaki (1982) and sitaara (1984). after sitaara, producer kamineni prasad approached vamsy and gave him an advance for making the next film with him. he was fine with any story. he just wanted an outline of the story. vamsy thought of making a suspense film. he was interested in this genre from his childhood. he recollected a kannada film aparichita (1978) he watched some time back. it was completely shot in a forest. he also wanted to write a similar story line. he had an outline of the story. he worked with several script writers, but he was not satisfied with them. then he tried to write the story as a novel. at the same time, indira gandhi was assassinated and there was unrest in the country and all the shootings were cancelled. in this time period, he completed the novel and showed it to the producers, and they liked it.the art director thota tarani built a set in talakona forest near tirupati. the film unit stayed in a nearby village, nerabailu.


== music ==
ilaiyaraaja composed the music for this film. vamsi and ilaiyaraaja went to madurai to compose the music for the film. it took more than a week for ilaiyaraaja to compose the re-recording for this film.  lyrics of all the songs were written by veturi. the music rights of the film were acquired by aditya music.


== references ==


== external links ==
anveshana at imdb