any day now is  a 2012 american drama film directed by travis fine, who rewrote the original screenplay that george arthur bloom had written 30 years previously.


== history ==
bloom describes the story behind getting the film made:
"the screenplay for any day now was inspired by a true story  not based on a true story. i wrote the original script 30 years ago. a friend of mine in ny introduced me to a gay man named rudy. rudy lived on atlantic ave in brooklyn. at that time, atlantic ave was pretty rundown. it has been gentrified since then. rudy lived in a tiny apartment and had very little money. he befriended a 12-year-old boy who lived a few blocks away. the boy had been abandoned by his druggie/prostitute mother, and lived with his grandmother. the grandmother didnt do much to provide for the boy, who didnt speak. im guessing he was autistic, but there was no money to do anything about it. rudy would bring the boy to his apartment, see to it that he was properly clothed and fed, and he did what he could to get him into school. he practically raised him. that is where reality ended and my writers imagination took over. after spending time with rudy and the boy, i got to wondering what would happen if rudy decided to adopt him. i did my research and spoke to a number of people about the problems a gay man would have adopting a boy. remember, this was 1980. the times were a lot different then, although we still have a long way to go. several months later i had a screenplay."
despite having a compelling story, bloom would have to wait 32 years to actually see the film made. he explains:
"my son, pj, is one of the top music supervisors in la, as well as a record producer and publisher. among other shows, pj is the music supervisor on glee. travis fine, the director of any day now, made another independent movie 3 years ago called the space between. travis and pj were friends in high school. when travis needed help with the music on his movie he contacted pj. when the movie was done, travis told pj he was looking for another movie to do, something small, with heart, and about something important. pj, who has known about my script his entire adult life, told travis the story. travis loved it, and asked that i send him the screenplay. i did, and he said he wanted to make it, with the caveat that he could do some rewriting. we discussed that, and i agreed. travis did his rewrite, raised the money, hired the actors, and made the movie. if you discount the first 30 years of trying to get the movie made, the last couple have gone by quickly. i love everything travis did to the script, and hes made a marvelous movie. he changed the boy who didnt speak to a boy with down's syndrome, and cast an extraordinary actor with down's syndrome to play the part. travis made several other significant changes, but the heart and soul of my screenplay remain as the anchor to the movie."


== plot ==
rudy donatello (alan cumming) is a struggling musician and drag performer in a gay nightclub in 1979 west hollywood, where he meets paul fleiger (garret dillahunt), a closeted district attorney. returning home to his apartment, rudy finds marco (isaac leyva), a 14-year-old with down syndrome, left alone after his mother, marianna (jamie anne allman), had been arrested. rudy takes in the abandoned boy, but family services intervenes and takes marco to foster care. rudy enlists paul to help him gain custody of marco; and the two visit marianna in prison to coax her into signing the temporary guardianship papers, which she does. all is well as rudy and paul become marco's guardians; but, when rudy and paul's relationship is called into question by the court system, the two men find themselves spiraling into a legal battle to become the legal and permanent guardians of the fascinating boy who showed them both the real joy of what it means to be a parent. after having their home (marco's living environment) evaluated, the men are put in front of a judge (frances fisher) who is to decide what's best for the child. the evaluation comes back positive, and it is decided that rudy and paul are great parents for marco. however, just as the court is about to rule in favor of the men, marco's mother is released from prison. she takes back custody of marco, leaving rudy and paul without their son. marco is heard saying as he is taken back to his mother's apartment, "this is not my home, this is not my home." as expected, marianna returns to her old ways (using drugs, sleeping around, etc.) and fails to take care of marco. one night as she is having sex, marianna tells marco to step outside of the apartment. marco begins to wander the streets in search of paul's house (his true home).
the film ends with marco's death under a bridge after 3 days of wandering, devastating rudy and paul.


== cast ==
alan cumming as rudy donatello
garret dillahunt as paul fliger
gregg henry as lambert
jamie anne allman as marianna deleon
chris mulkey as d.a. wilson
don franklin as lonnie
kelli williams as miss flemming
alan rachins as judge richard resnick
frances fisher as judge meyerson
isaac leyva as marco deleon
mindy sterling as miss mills
miracle laurie as monica
michael nouri as miles dubrow
jeffrey pierce as officer plitt
anne o'shea as mrs. lowell
randy roberts as p.j.
louis lombardi as mr. blum
joe howard as dr. watkins
randy thompson as coco
ezra buzzington as larry
clyde kusatsu as dr. nakahura
kamala lopez as miss martinez


== reception ==
any day now received generally positive reviews, currently holding an 79% "certified fresh" rating on rotten tomatoes.


== awards ==
chicago international film festival 2012 - audience choice award for best narrative feature
seattle international film festival 2012 - best actor award, alan cumming
seattle international film festival 2012 - best film
tribeca film festival 2012 - heineken audience award
outfest 2012 - audience award - outstanding dramatic feature film
outfest 2012 - outstanding actor in a us dramatic feature film, alan cumming
provincetown international film festival 2012 - audience award
woodstock film festival 2012 - audience award
glaad media award 2012 - best film in limited release


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
any day now at imdb
any day now at allmovie
any day now at box office mojo
any day now at rotten tomatoes
any day now at metacritic