apache trail is a 1942 american western film directed by richard thorpe, written by maurice geraghty, and starring lloyd nolan, donna reed, william lundigan, ann ayars, connie gilchrist, and chill wills. the picture was released on june 24, 1942, by metro-goldwyn-mayer.


== plot ==
tom o'folliard (william lundigan) is released from jail and seeks work at his prior employer, a stagecoach line. he is sent to manage a stagecoach rest stop in a remote area. upon arrival, he meets a woman, seora martinez (connie gilchrist) and her daughter rosalia (donna reed) who cook and clean at the rest stop. when the next stage arrives, among its cargo is a strong box with cash. soon after, folliard's brother "trigger" bill folliard (lloyd nolan), a known outlaw arrives and seeks shelter from the local apaches, whom he has offended. upon his discovery that a strong box is present, he plans to steal it and make a getaway.
during tom folliard's absence from the rest stop, trigger bill gets the upper hand on the stagecoach line employees watching him and tries to escape with the proceeds but is thwarted by his brother's arrival back at the rest stop. soon thereafter, the apaches attack the rest stop but are repulsed. they demand trigger bill and in return they will leave the rest stop alone. a vote is taken by all those in the rest stop with tom casting the deciding vote to not give his brother to the apaches. during the next attack bill, previously expertly shot through both hands by his brother, elects in noble fashion to sacrifice himself to save the others by riding away from the rest stop. meanwhile, tom, after a brief flirtation with one of the stagecoach passengers, constance selden (ann ayars), tells seora martinez that he would like to court her daughter.


== cast ==
lloyd nolan as trigger bill folliard
donna reed as rosalia martinez
william lundigan as tom o'folliard
ann ayars as constance selden
connie gilchrist as seora martinez
chill wills as 'pike' skelton
miles mander as james v. thorne
gloria holden as mrs. james v. thorne
ray teal as ed cotton
grant withers as 'les' lestrade
fuzzy knight as juke
trevor bardette as amber
tito renaldo as cochee
frank m. thomas as maj. lowden
george watts as judge keeley
mitchell lewis as bolt saunders (uncredited)


== references ==


== external links ==
apache trail at imdb