aparajita tumi (english: you, undefeated) is a 2012 indian bengali-language drama film directed by aniruddha roy chowdhury. the film stars prosenjit chatterjee, kamalinee mukherjee, padmapriya janakiraman, chandan roy sanyal, indraneil sengupta. it is a venture of director aniruddha roy chowdhury after his successful and critically acclaimed movie antaheen. this film also had shantanu moitra as music director and anindya and chandril as lyricists like tony's previous film. the film is an adaptation of the novel dui nari hathe tarbari by famous bengali writer sunil gangopadhyay.


== plot ==
pradip and kuhu, an nri couple with two children, start having problems because of kuhu's straightforward nature and blatant comments which end up hurting people. ushoshi and ronojoy are another couple. while ronojoy seems to be a cynical workaholic who is not bothered about the voids in his life, ushoshi is extremely sensitive about things like their childlessness. as kuhu repeatedly hurts the insecure ushoshi, pradip finds himself empathizing with her, and they eventually end up having an affair. kuhu moves out with her children, whom she temporarily places in the care of her parents, while she takes time to think about her next step. meanwhile, she has a brief encounter with ex-boyfriend yusuf, which brings back nostalgic old memories, pain and loneliness. while yusuf is clearly interested in a relationship, kuhu is cold and distant, which finally drives him away.
meanwhile, pradip suffers from splitting headaches, and it is soon discovered that he has cancer. as he battles the disease, kuhu finally comes back, perhaps forgiving him. ushoshi's husband comes to know about her affair with pradip, and profoundly eccentric and cynical as he is, he sets her free to choose what she wants to do next without complaint. ushoshi comes to visit pradip, and kuhu behaves quite normally with her, attempting to brush aside any bitterness. ushoshi says that she has decided to return to india, and leaves without saying goodbye to pradip.
in the end, kuhu is seen alone on a beach, clutching a book of poems (   ) yusuf had presented her, and along with that, she holds a letter he had left her, mentioning how he was going away, not willing to disturb her anymore.


== cast ==
prosenjit chatterjee as pradip
kamalinee mukherjee as ushashi
padmapriya janakiraman as kuhu
chandan roy sanyal as ranojoy
indraneil sengupta as yusuf
tanusree shankar as kuhu's mother
kalyan ray as kuhu's uncle
soumitra chatterjee (guest appearance) as himself
emielyn das as pradip's daughter, chandra
rik dev mukherji as robi


== soundtrack ==
the song roopkathara was a chart topper and received rave reviews from the audience.

all music is composed by shantanu moitra.


== awards ==


== see also ==
bengali films of 2012


== references ==


== external links ==
official website