apothecary  is a 2014 indian malayalam-language medical thriller film directed by madhav ramadasan, and produced by george mathew and baby mathew under the banner of arambankudiyil cinemas. the film stars suresh gopi, jayasurya, abhirami, meera nandan, indrans, and asif ali.
the film received special jury mention in 45th kerala state film awards for indrans and producer dr. george mathew.


== plot ==
dr. vijay nambiar (suresh gopi) is a skilled and renowned neurosurgeon. he lives with his wife, dr. nalini nambiar (abhirami), and their two children. both doctors work at the apothecary hospital. the film begins with nambiar's being admitted to the hospital because of a motor vehicle accident. he has suffered a brain injury, and his chance of survival seems slim. subin joseph (jayasurya), a patient of nambiar's, comes to visit him.
subin recounts his experience at the hospital under nambiar's care. the hospital is revealed to be run greedily, with patients being subjected to expensive and unnecessary tests and medicines. nambiar is a doctor with a good reputation, but is forced by the management to run clinical trials for new drugs. he realizes that such trials are necessary for progress, but the lack of ethical protocol and the side effects of such drugs turn the patients' lives into a living hell.
this dilemma consumes him, causing him to have hallucinations of his clinical trial patients. his soul is locked in a surreal struggle between the good and the bad actions of his work. his accident resulted from such an episode, wherein he fell to the road in a fit of panic. finally, he is redeemed with the realization that his work has saved thousands, compared to the few lives destroyed by his actions. should he live, he would go on to save even more lives.
nambiar returns to life a changed man. he confronts the hospital board about their actions. he reminds them of the definition of 'apothecary' which was used years back, to refer to doctors who treated village folk with their medicines. stating that the hospital simply retains that name, he leaves the hospital to set up a charitable institution. his wife and several of the hospital staff and patients accompany him on his new journey.


== cast ==
suresh gopi as dr. vijay nambiar
jayasurya as subin joseph
asif ali as prathapan
arun as dr. raheem
abhirami as dr.nalini nambiar, wife of dr. vijay
meera nandan as daisy, lover of subin
raghavan nair as dr. shankar vasudev
indrans as joseph, father of subin
kavitha nair as sabira usman
thampy antony as dr. ali ahamed
neeraj madhav as shinoy joseph, brother of subin
lishoy as dr. peethambaran
malavika as meenu
jayaraj warrier as varkkichan
seema g. nair as clara, mother of subin
jayan cherthala as sajan xavier
mohanakrishnan as hameed
dr. george mathew as dr. mathew koshi
shivakumar as dr. mk nambiar, father of dr. vijay
preman as meenu's father
sajad brite as usman, husband of sabira
neeraja as dr. nimisha
saniya iyappan
bindu krishna as dr. maria


== reception ==
paresh c palicha of rediff movies praised suresh gopi's performance and noted that the film could have been better. nicy, v.p. of international business times, wrote that apothecary is a must watch. she also praised performance of jayasurya.


== awards and honours ==


== references ==


== external links ==
apothecary at imdb