aradhana (transl.devotion)  is a 1962 indian telugu-language romance film produced by v. b. rajendra prasad and d. ranga rao under the jagapathi art productions banner and directed by v. madhusudhan rao. it stars akkineni nageswara rao, savitri  and music composed by saluri rajeswara rao. the film is a remake of bengali film sagarika (1956). the film was recorded as a super hit at the box office.. the sequence of the song ohoho mamayya was shot in gevacolor as it is clearly stated in the censor certificate and the film credits.


== plot ==
dr. murali krishna (akkineni nageswara rao) an introvert, diligent, aspires to study abroad as a last wish of his mother. appreciating his dedication the college principal v.r.rao (gummadi)   approves the scholarship. during that time, krishna loves a medico anuradha (savitri) which envies another student sarala (rajasri). so, she writes a love letter to anuradha in the name of krishna which makes her furious and complaints to the principal, as a result, krishna loses his scholarship. humiliated krishna gets back to the village, despite his father gopalam decides to send krishna abroad. so, he approaches a crafty wealthy person in their village langaru chinalingaiah (ramana reddy) who grants the amount on a condition to couple up his daughter lakshmi (girija) with krishna. helpless gopalam accepts the deal and krishna leaves. thereafter, dr. saradhi (jaggayya) the close friend of krishna chides anuradha even sarala repents and admits her mistake. right now, anuradha stats loving krishna when the wheel of fortune makes chinalingaiah as her paternal uncle, he announces the marriage proposal and requests anuradha to educate & transform lakshmi as fashionable. knowing it, anuradha collapses but withstands and moves forward with her entrusted responsibility. meanwhile, gopalam apprises krishna regarding the promise given to chinalingaiah and asks him to communicate with lakshmi to anuradha's address. in the city, lakshmi falls for her cousin yoganandam (relangi), becomes carefree and doesn't show any interest in krishna. at present, anuradha writes replies to krishna on behalf of lakshmi and both of them close in. at that point in time, a tragic incident, krishna loses his eyesight in an accident when chinalingaiah drops the match and everyone quits krishna. after return, anuradha serves him out of adoration by purporting herself as lakshmi. after some time, v.r.rao & saradhi plan a surgery to regain krishna's eyesight. meanwhile, lakshmi realizes the love affair of krishna & anuradha, so, she accuses & elopes with yoganandam but chinalingaiah forcibly brings her back. soon after the surgery, anuradha disappears replacing lakshmi but krishna recognizes and perturbs to see lakshmi that served him which leads to loss of recouped sight. here chinalingaiah & saradhi convinces and gets back despite when krishna becomes normal and learns the truth. finally, the movie ends on a happy note with the marriages of krishna & anuradha and yoganandam & lakshmi.


== cast ==
akkineni nageswara rao as dr. murali krishna
savitri as anuradha
jaggayya as dr. saradhi
gummadi as principal v.r.rao
relangi as yoganandam
ramana reddy as langaru chinnalingaiah
dr. sivaramakrishnaiah as bondam
rajasree as sarala
girija as lakshmi
l. vijayalakshmi as dancer


== production ==
aradhana is a remake of the bengali film sagarika (1956). the song "ohoho mamayya" was planned to be filmed at madras zoo, but as the location was not found to be visually satisfying due to continuous smoke emerging from coal engines there, the song was instead filmed at mysore zoo.


== soundtrack ==
music composed by saluri rajeswara rao. all songs are evergreen blockbusters.  music released on audio company.


== other ==
vcds and dvds on  volga videos, hyderabad


== references ==


== external links ==
 aradhana  at complete index to world film
aradhana at imdb
cinegoer's aradhana story
aradhana movie review
full movie in you tube.