armaan (transl.desire) is a 2003 indian hindi-language medical drama film that was co-written and directed by honey irani. starring an ensemble cast of amitabh bachchan, anil kapoor, preity zinta, gracy singh, and randhir kapoor, the film sets in a hospital and follows the travails of its principal, dr. akash (anil kapoor), to sustain the institution financially. in this period, a schizophrenic woman named sonia (zinta) comes into his life and offers help by giving a donation with a provision to marry her.
the story of armaan was written by irani, who also done the screenplay along with javed akhtar. principal photography (handled by ravi varman) took place in india and africa, and the film was subsequently edited by shirish kunder. was released on 16 may 2003. made on a production cost of 100 million (us$1.4 million), it was declared a commercial failure and only collected 149.2 million (us$2.1 million). garnering mixed reviews from critics, however, the film was applauded for irani's direction and the performances, particularly that from bachchan and zinta. the actress received several nominations for her performance as the antagonist of the film at the filmfare awards, producers guild film awards, and screen awards.


== plot ==
dr. siddharth sinha and his son, dr. akash sinha, work as doctors in the same hospital founded by the former. siddharth wishes to run a state-of-the-art hospital but his profession requires him to dedicates his time to his patients. soon, a new doctor, named dr. neha mathur, join the hospital and subsequently falls for akash. however, the arrival of sonia kapoor later changes the two's relationship. sonia is a jealous, spoilt woman who is used to having things her own way and it is not long before she wants akash for herself. she decides that since akash is the man for her, she can latch on to him by literally getting his love through financial agreement. the agreement states that on marrying sonia, her father gulshan kapoor will help finance the hospital project.
siddharth dies in his attempt to bring a child injured in an accident to his hospital. his last wish is for the hospital to be properly completed. akash, now burdened with the increasing debts to purchase equipment for the hospital, cannot arrange for further funds. over a broken heart, he agrees to marry sonia, in order to set up the hospital, and thus fulfilling his father's final wish. neha understands this and agrees to break up with akash, but offers to continue working in the same hospital because she is a professional and dedicated person.
after the marriage, sonia starts suspecting akash is having an affair with neha and annoying both of them. she cannot stand neha, who is still working at the hospital, and keeps coming up with all kinds of reasons to get neha out. in one such quest, she is involved in a serious accident and has serious damage to her brain. now akash has to operate on her. for a moment, he is in a dilemma, because curing sonia would mean facing her problems again. but, he decides to fulfill his duty as doctor and sonia later recovers. she comes to know that she was operated by him, even when she created all kinds of problems for him. dawned, sonia for akash's forgiveness and gives him divorce, freeing him to marry and settle down with neha.


== cast ==
credits adapted from box office india:
amitabh bachchan as dr. siddharth sinha
anil kapoor as dr. akash sinha
preity zinta as sonia sinha
gracy singh as dr. neha mathur
randhir kapoor as gulshan kapoor
aamir bashir as dr. sanjayhrithik roshan made a cameo appearance.


== production ==
in april 2002, the entertainment website rediff.com reported that honey irani would make her debut as a director in a then-untitled film. having writing stories and screenplays for many films, she stated that she always aspired to have a project she directed for a long time because she wanted to feel how directors executed their ideas by themselves without any interventions from other people. she spoke of her experiment with her first self-directed film: "it is a great feeling to create a film from the story you have written. it is all about words taking shape in the form of visuals. i just love it ... it is wonderful. i am enjoying it immensely." according to irani, she had planned to touch the rare genre of medical drama with the filmwhich was later titled armaan (transl.desire)explore the innermost desires and relationships of people. the screenplay was written by irani and her ex-husband and then-close friend javed akhtar (who also wrote the film's dialogues) and completed later that year in september in 92 days.irani's daughter, zoya akhtar, done the casting of armaan. when the screenplay was finished, it was announced that bachchan, anil kapoor, singh, zinta, and randhir kapoor were chosen for the leads, marking the former two's first film with a woman director. playing the role of a doctor for the first time, anil kapoor admitted that the film had given him chances to do many different things. bachchan, the first actor irani wanted to cast since the film was conceived, played his father and it was also the first film to feature the actors together in a scene. in an interview to the journalist subhash k. jha, she confessed that it was her dream to work with bachchanwho immediately agreed after she offered him the partadding that it was modelled after his personality. bachchan himself has also spoke of his excitement after knowing that the venture was to be directed by a woman. the role of dr. neha mathur was originally planned to be played by tabu, but she later was replaced by gracy singh, whose performance in ashutosh gowariker's sport film lagaan (2001) attracted irani to meet her and gave her the character. irani believed that singh's role as a doctor made her less glamorous.zinta was seen in the film as sonia, making armaan the first film involved her as the antagonist character; describing herself as a honest and outspoken person, she liked the role, particularly for its "insane" character, because it let her to "give vent to all [of her] frustrations". calling it the best role of her acting career, she commented: "if she didn't like something, she would show it in a sneaky way. i loved the freedom of saying anything i wanted to and not worrying about what the other person would think." in an interview published by filmfare in their september 2003 issue, talking about her acting career and on-screen image, zinta added that she took part solely to remove her "cute-and-bubbly" image, which she disliked. prior to her, several actresses were asked to have the part, including tabu, rani mukerji, and aishwarya rai. randhir kapoor played zinta's father, the businessman gulshan, and it meant that it was his first feature since mother (1999) was released. roshan made a cameo apperance.irani revealed her colleagues called her a "trendsetter" as she was the first woman director at the time who directed a big-budgeted bollywood film; the total production cost of armaan was 100 million (equivalent to 300 million or us$4.1 million in 2019). ravi varman worked as the cinematographer, while yunnus pathan and kiran khanna completed the production design. as the film's main set is a hospital, soft contrast and diffused lightings were required. the choreographers were farah khan, geeta kapoor, and saroj khan, and kaushalmoses done the action direction. the film was shot in a single schedule in mumbai, mussoorie, mauritius and sun city in 82 to 92 days. after the filming ended in late 2002, the film, using sync sound, was edited by shirish kunder and its background score was composed by raju singh. it was produced by dinesh gandhi of aarti enterprises and distributed by eros entertainment.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack for armaan was composed by the trio shankarehsaanloy, with lyrics written by akhtar. bachchan, udit narayan, mahalakshmi iyer, shankar mahadevan, alka yagnik, shaan, k. s. chithra, sonu nigam, sunidhi chauhan, shreya ghoshal, and roop kumar rathod performed the vocals. it was released under the label of t-series on 22 march 2003.the soundtrack album garnered positive responses from critics. writing for the entertainment portal bollywood hungama, joginder tuteja called it "a class product which has though been composed keeping the elite in mind, still strikes a chord with everyone alike", and the hindu believed that shankarehsaanloy had made the soundtrack "uplifting". lalitha suhasini of the indian express declared it as one of the greatest album of the year. planet bollywood's rakesh budhu added, "for armaan, shankarehsaanloy have shown us why their talent is worth our attention and how they are different from other great composers, like a. r. rahman."


== marketing and release ==

armaan was one of the most anticipated indian films of the year, owing to its advertisement as the first film directed by irani, who was known as a established screenwriter of films, making the enthusiasm of the audience and moviegoers increased. talking to the journalist suchitra behal of the hindu, irani, however, had low expectations with the film and spoke of her nervousness with its commercial performance. as parts of the promotion, an official website was launched at a press conference held in mumbai in april 2003. in an article in rediff.com, subhash k. jha publsihed that people's word-of-mouth described the film as a thanda (transl.cold) film, and irani saw this as an advantage.the premiere of armaan happened on 16 may 2003 and, on the next day, it was screened at the 2003 cannes film festival. it was released on 195 screens across india and grossed 7.5 million (us$110,000) on the first day. by the end of its first week, the film collected 39.4 million (us$550,000). in the second week of its overseas running, armaan had a revenue of $296,702 and $691,121 in the united states and the united kingdom, respectively. according to box office india, it collected a total grossing of 149.5 million (us$2.1 million) worldwide and was declared as a commercial failure. the film remains as irani's only project she directed, and she is continuing her work as a screenwriter. it was subsequently released on dvd on 30 june as a single-disc pack in the ntsc widescreen format. since 2 may 2016, it has been available for streaming on amazon prime video.


== critical reception ==
upon release, armaan met with a mixed critical reception, with the performances of the cast (mostly that from bachchan and zinta) were lavishly praised. critics, however, panned the film for irani's direction and its slow pace along with lack of freshness in the plot. sanjeev singh bariana of the tribune was impressed by its technical detail, and commended zinta for having "outclassed everyone". in an article published by komal nahta, he realised the resemblance between the film and the 2002 television series sanjivani, in which the main set is also an hospital. khalid mohamed, writing for mid day, noted irani's sincerity but was critical of the outcome. he did, however, praise bachchan as "faultless" and call zinta "the peppy scene-stealer, achieving her manic mood swings dexterously". similar views were written by vinayak chakravorty from hindustan times; he concluded that there was "nothing to write home about in this film" except for zinta's performance, which, according to him, "takes over the script and, indeed, the film, unleashing a brilliant act as the deceptively bubbly but manipulative wife". dinesh raheja referred to zinta as the film's attraction and was positive of anil kapoor and randhir kapoor as well, explaining that the latter two's surname would make the audience surmised that their acting was influenced by their same surname.

screen's deven sharma described armaan as "a truthful depiction of a professional's integrity to his calling and to himself, and despite the somewhat slow pace, manages to tug at your heart", and wrote of the cast, "the four principal actors have risen above their roles and have given splendid performances." ziya us salam of the hindu observed of hirani's direction: "her ways have to be admired, her lines good enough to bear repetition, her sensitivity worthy of emulation. however, let's refrain from too much adulation as her debut venture armaan has its bleak moments too, just as it has its sunny ones." he further praised singh's "poised, pleasant" acting and zinta for her "verve and vivacity" as a "blundering, scheming spoilt child who marries innocence with guile", hailing her performance as "just about perfect". sify called the film "an entertainer" which is "pleasing to the eye" and with a good storyline. the reviewer noted irani for having "brought out some of the best moments in amitabh bachchan's and anil kapoor's career", and took note of zinta's screen presence, commending her for proving "she is one among those actresses who can combine good looks with histrionics".jitesh pillai of the times of india was ambivalent about armaan; he criticised its "crippling pace", but appreciating the credibility of the script, the cinematography, and the actors, calling bachchan "brilliant", kapoor "first-rate" and commending singh for bringing dignity to her underdeveloped role and zinta for adding "vim, vigour and sparkles with comic timing" to her part. rediff.com's critic deepa gumaste was particularly critical of the film, disliking the performances and finding the overall product to be "way off the mark". giving the film two stars, namrata joshi of outlook found it to be disappointing and, after comparing it to the 1960 film dil apna aur preet parai, said that armaan only repeats the story but with a different ending. taran adarsh from bollywood hungama praised the acting while concluded that the film "leaves a lot to be desired. the content ... does not match the heavy star cast, which in turn will tell on its business." another review for mid day, by narendra kusnur, wrote it off as extremely slow but liked the performances.manish gajjar from the bbc applauded irani for revisiting "the same formula with [adding] freshness and zest", further noting kapoor for delivering "his best", zinta for her "superb acting", and bachchan for "outstanding performance". derek elley of variety declared bachchan as the film's headline, but believed his performance was largely overshadowed by the other leads, adding, "bollywood watchers should keep an eye out for this well-scripted item." he singled out the most colourful performance by zinta, who, "though playing an archetypal bad sort, manages to make the self-obsessed soniya an almost sympathetic character through the sheer vivaciousness of her part-child, part-vamp playing." deepa gahlot summarised, "anil kapoor is earnest as always, but looks jaded. preity zinta in an awful 'cleopatra' get-up is irritatingly twittery, and gracy singh totally bland". she was disappointed by the casting of bachchan in what she described as "an insignificant role, [which] getting rid of him and then making him walk around as a ghost." in a review in the magazine stardust, the editor ram kamal mukherjee felt the entire film was "predictable and boring at times", attributing it to the screenplay and irani's direction.


== accolades ==


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
armaan at imdb
armaan at box office mojo
armaan at rotten tomatoes