athanokkade  is a 2005 indian telugu-language action film written and directed by surender reddy. it stars kalyan ram, sindhu tolani, and ashish vidyarthi in the lead roles, with the music composed by mani sharma.
the film was released theatrically on 7 may 2005. following its commercial success, the film was remade in tamil as aathi and in kannada as lakshmana. it was also dubbed in hindi as international don.


== plot ==
the opening scene shows anjali (sindhu tolani) sitting on a bench feeding a white pigeon by a calm ocean, and a retired dgp shankar (ahuti prasad) coming and sitting by her side and exchanging pleasantries. suddenly, she whips out a knife and stabs him to death with the help of her maternal uncle ramachandran (surya), saying that she has been waiting for this moment for many years.
after that, the scene shifts to ram (nandamuri kalyan ram) who lives with his loving parents (chandra mohan and rajya lakshmi) and sister (sudeepa pinky) in new delhi. he takes up a course in a hyderabad college against his parents' wishes. unable to be separated from ram, his parents and sister come to hyderabad along with him.
it is revealed that anjali is studying in the same college as ram, and she has her own agenda to seek revenge on her family's killers, assisted by ramachandran. now the villain anna (ashish vidyarthi), a local gangster, enters and is shown to have a dispute with another person pattabhai (rami reddy). to exact their revenge, ramachandran attempts to kill one of anna's aides, abdullah (raghu babu), but fails to do so since ram kills him. naturally, anna assumes that the killer can be none other than pattabhai, so he kills him. however, ram arrives on the scene, and with help from gulab singh (venu madhav), he threatens anna telling that he was the one who killed abdullah and that he will also kill sada (g. v. sudhakar naidu), anna's second main aide. as typical, sada gets angry and goes to kill ram but fails, and ram kills sada while his parents are watching with horror. on being questioned, ram tells his story.
ram's biological father (prakash raj) was an honest cop who arrested one of anna's henchmen. it is revealed that anjali and ram are from the same family, as anjali's father is ram's father's brother-in-law. anna pays ram's house a visit and asks his grandfather (chalapati rao) to let his henchmen go. when ram's grandfather refuses, anna threatens them only to find knives held at him by ram and his cousins. ram's father arrives and arrests anna. infuriated, he pays them a visit with some of his henchmen and shankar. together, they murder their whole extended family. only anjali, ramachandran, and ram survived the blast that annihilated their family. after the house is blown up by anna, ram escapes and is taken in by his foster parents. meanwhile, anjali feels that one of her family members is still alive, as someone keeps a flower on the buddha statue of their former house, which is now the city library. it turns out to be none other than ram.
on finding out his past, ram's foster parents request him to come back, but he refuses. he then takes them to the railway station, but is nearly ambushed. he succeeds on defeating them and meets anna, warning him to bring his brother (ajay) from dubai. soon, he arrives and kills ramachandran in revenge before challenging ram to meet him at his brother's place. ram comes, and after finding out that anna had anjali kidnapped, escapes after killing ajay. in a thrilling climax, ram kills anna, and is shown to be leaving with anjali, the only one left in his family.


== cast ==


== crew ==
director: surender reddy
screenplay: surender reddy
story: surender reddy
dialogue: marudhuri raja
producer: nandamuri janaki ram
music: mani sharma
cinematography: c. ram prasad
art direction: narayana reddy
editing: gautham raju
action : stun siva


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by mani sharma and released by aditya music.


== release ==
the film was released with 72 prints initially and later 24 prints were added.


== review ==
this film became a big hit. it ran for 50 days in 80 centres and crossed 100 days in 46 centres.


== awards ==
filmfare awards southbest villain - ashish vidyarthinandi awardsbest debut director - surender reddy
best character actor - chandra mohan


== references ==


== external links ==
athanokkade at imdb