athadu (transl.him) is a 2005 indian telugu-language action crime thriller film written and directed by trivikram srinivas. the film features an ensemble cast of mahesh babu, trisha, sonu sood, sayaji shinde, kota srinivasa rao,  prakash raj, nassar, sunil, rahul dev and brahmanandam. it was produced by d. kishore and m. ram mohan under the jayabheri arts banner while actor murali mohan was the presenter of the film. story, screenplay and dialogues were penned by srinivas while sirivennela sitaramasastri and viswa penned the lyrics for the songs. the soundtrack was scored by mani sharma. k. v. guhan handled the cinematography of the film while sreekar prasad edited it. thota tharani was the art director of the film while peter hein was the stunt and fight choreographer.
the film went on to become one of the highest grossing telugu films in and marked mahesh babu's career resurgence after a few unsuccessful films. it won 3 nandi awards and a filmfare awards south in best director category. it was later remade in hindi as ek starring bobby deol & shriya saran and in bengali bangladesh as  rastar chele starring kazi maruf & shahara and in bengali as wanted starring jeet & srabanti.


== plot ==
professional hitman nanda "nandu" gopal is contracted for inr 1,50,00,000 to fake an assassination attempt on opposition leader shiva reddy as part of the latter's plan to garner votes via sympathy to become the chief minister. after planning the hit and escape with his friend and partner-in-crime malli, nandu prepares to take the shot, but someone suddenly shoots shiva reddy dead. the police immediately surround the building and nandu watches in shock as malli is killed in a car accident. cornered by the police, nandu jumps off the building and onto a train. in one of the compartments, he meets pardhasaradhi "pardhu", who was returning to his village, basarlapudi, after running away 12 years ago. later that same night, the police arrives at gudivada, where the train is running 20 minutes late. the si of the search party spots nandu and takes a shot at him, but pardhu accidentally comes in the way and is shot instead. nandu escapes in the ensuing confusion and arrives at basarlapudi, and thinking that he is pardhu, the latter's family rejoices at his return. pardhu's cousin poori constantly tries to get his attention. as nandu grows closer to his new family, he solves many of their problems. nandu also aids a family whose son's death was indirectly caused by pardhu (which was what made pardhu run away). nandu later discloses his identity to pardhu's childhood friend ramana in a subsequent conversation. nandu also eventually reciprocates poori's love, telling her that he doesn't know what living with a family feels like, and is slowly learning to embrace all of them. pardhu's grandfather, satya narayana murthy shows nandu a shotgun that pardhu's father(his son) used for hunting, telling him that his son died after being hit with a ricocheting bullet caused by a stone being stuck in the barrel, similar to the marbles that the kids play with.
meanwhile, cbi officer anjaneya prasad is handed the case of shiva reddy's murder. his initial investigation turns up three issues: that the weapon was not fired, that shiva reddy couldn't be shot in the center of the head from this angle and the police surrounded the building as if they were tipped off. suspecting pardhu may not be who he claims, and hoping to match his fingerprints to the gun present at the crime scene, prasad arrives at basarlapudi and questions nandu and tries to get his fingerprints, but is outsmarted. the subsequent investigation leads him to the accident that prevented nandu from escaping; however, probing into that angle reveals that both vehicles involved in the accident (malli's car and a petrol tanker) were hired by malli, resulting in another dead end. but after talking with ex-gangster and nandu and malli's mentor sadhu, prasad realises that nandu is masqerading as pardhu. learning that they would have kept their money in banks, prasad locates nandu's bank account by searching for accounts that had a sudden inflow of money in the days leading to shiva reddy's assassination. he learns of a transfer that took place recently, and heads to the destination bank to check, discovering the transfer was a 10 lakh cheque encashed by murthy for poori's sister's marriage that was taken from nandu's account. prasad calls the house and tricks nandu into responding to his real name, and arrives at the house to find him gone. prasad breaks the news of pardhu's death to the family and of nandu's masqerade, leaving them devastated. ramana defends nandu by saying that nandu had no reason to help the family with their issues without them knowing, yet he did, chastising the family for being too quick to judge him based on his past.
nandu returns amidst outrage from the other family members for his betrayal, and explains that though he intended to break the news of pardhu's death to the family, he couldn't bring himself to do it after meeting pardhu's aunt and grandfather. he also explains that though he lied about pardhu, he never tried to cheat the family by pretending to be pardhu. murthy takes him into the study, where he emphasizes that despite the chance to escape, nandu came here and decided to help the family with their issues, hence nandu is truly his grandson, his "pardhu", in his eyes. murthy hands the family gun to nandu, urging him to fight whoever was responsible for framing him as the murderer of shiva reddy. by threatening shiva reddy's colleague, baji reddy, nandu learns that malli is actually alive and faked his death. he also learns that malli called baji reddy and offered to do the job for a lesser amount. baji reddy instead offered malli inr 2,00,00,000 to kill shiva reddy in a move to become chief minister himself. letting baji reddy that he recorded the conversation, he heads to malli's location; prasad and team see him at an intersection and one of prasad's colleagues, ravi tries to shoot him, but nandu manages to escape, leaving prasad forcing ravi to tell him why he shot nandu. when nandu meets malli, malli reveals that instead of working along with nandu and getting only half, he decided to take up baji reddy's offer and kill shiva reddy and place the blame on nandu, getting inr 2,50,00,000 from baji reddy and his cut from the original hit. both are ambushed by corrupt police sent by baji reddy, but nandu dispatches them all and engages in hand to hand combat with malli and overpowers him. both run for a weapon and malli picks up nandu's shotgun. realising that nandu's gun is empty, malli prepares to kill nandu, only to be killed by the bullet backfiring due to a marble being stuck in the barrel. when prasad arrives at the scene, he receives the recording from nandu. prasad meets with baji reddy and plys the tape for him. when baji reddy remarks that this won't guarantee his conviction, prasad states that though he's right, the resulting investigation will reveal to shiva reddy's son, pratap reddy about baji reddy's crime. seeing no other option, baji reddy kills himself. nandu immerses pardhu's ashes and meets up with prasad, who effectively cleares nandu's name by placing the blame on baji reddy and malli, allowing nandu to return to basarlapudi.


== cast ==


== production ==


=== development ===
in an interview to the media about his film julai, trivikram shared his views on this film stating :

i narrated the story of athadu to mahesh babu before the start of nuvve nuvve shoot. before making of athadu, i fixed myself that i should not compromise at any cost. i wanted to make the film the way i envisioned it. i wanted to satisfy the audience in me after shooting every scene. i doubled checked each and every scene as an audience. i could able to do 80% of what i had imagined when i wrote the script. if you look at the first 15 minutes of athadu movie, you will realize the level of intensity and technical finesse.


=== casting ===
initially trivikram wanted to do this film with pawan kalyan and narrated the script.but he did not show much interest in signing the film and also slept during script narration. mahesh babu listened to the script of this film in 2002 but trvikram and the film's producers had to wait for him till he completes the shooting schedules of s. j. surya's science fiction film naani and gunasekhar's family drama arjun as they were his existing commitments then. the shooting started a month later after the completion of arjun. for his characterization and the dialogues uttered by the character he played, mahesh had to adjust to trivikram's style of dialogues which took 10 days. trisha krishnan was selected for the leading female role. in an interview to the media on 29 june 2005 at the event of audio release stated that she would be seen in a role with shades of comedy though she added that her role was a limited one.murali mohan later revealed that he wanted his friend and former telugu actor sobhan babu to play the role of satya narayana murthy which would have marked his comeback film who was busy with a highly profitable real estate business then. for the same, murali mohan even issued and sent a blank cheque to sobhan babu's residence at chennai as the remuneration. but sobhan babu refused to do that role and rejected the offer politely. later, nassar portrayed that role with s. p. balasubrahmanyam dubbing for him in frail voice and his performance was appreciated by critics.


=== filming ===
for the film's shoot, 160 motion cameras were imported from london to shoot time-freeze effect shots in action sequences which was clarified by mahesh himself as still cameras only. because of non compromising, not more than 10 shots were shot per day. 4 to 5 complicated action sequences were shot under supervision of peter hein with much finesse and the climax sequence was shot indoor which took enormous time to complete thus making the principal photography end after a span of two years. a big set was constructed at ramanaidu studios in nanakramguda at hyderabad where most of the film's family scenes were shot. on 7 august 2004, a scene featuring mahesh and sunil was shot on the bridge of the lake at icrisat campus in hyderabad.


== soundtrack ==
mani sharma composed the music for this film marking his first collaboration with trivikram srinivas and eighth collaboration with mahesh babu. the film's soundtrack was released by mahesh babu's father and prominent telugu actor krishna on 29 june 2005 at the house set of the film constructed at nanakramguda through maruthi music label. this album consists of six melodies composed by mani sharma while sirivennela sitaramasastri and viswa penned the lyrics. apart from krishna, the film's lead pair, producers and maruthi music representatives attended the event.the audio received moderately positive response from critics. indiaglitz wrote "mani sharma has tried to please all. if you are going to compare this one with his previous offerings for mahesh, it does not do any one any good. on its own, the album has its moments." upon the film's release, mani sharma's work was acclaimed by the critics and audience alike. indiaglitz wrote "mani sharma's music, especially the title song, is very good. his re-recording also fits the bill." idlebrain.com wrote "music by mani sharma is good. the picturization of the first song which comes as background song for titles is wonderful. neetho cheppana song has got typical mexican music. background music and rerecording of the film is good." sify.com wrote "the highlights of athadu are the camerawork of k. v. guhan and the melodious music and background score of mani sharma. the neeto chappana number picturised in the tea estates of darjeeling is the pick of the album." songs sung by eminent singers like s. p. balu, k. s. chithra, kavita krishnamurti, shreya ghoshal, mahalakshmi iyer, kk etc


== release ==


=== domestic ===
the film released in 79 centers in nizam region in andhra pradesh and was distributed by maruthi movies in which 3 centers screened the film for only 2 days. the film released in 24 centers across visakhapatnam and was distributed by sri venkateswara films. sri bharathi pictures released the film in krishna district in 18 centers. the film was released simultaneously in 3 screens in chennai and it was also the first telugu film to do so.


=== overseas ===
the film was released with 6 prints in united states and was distributed by vishnu mudda and soma kancherla of crown dvd distribution company in san jose, dallas, detroit, virginia, new jersey, atlanta, chicago, los angeles, boston, minneapolis, phoenix at arizona and also in centers like lowell at massachusetts, ma, tulsa at oklahoma, west virginia, springfield, boulder at colorado and corpus christi at south texas. because of the demand, another print was imported from india for screening. the film's first screening in usa happened at cine plaza 13 at north bergen on the night of 11 august 2005. at connecticut, a special screening was conducted on 19 august 2005. initially one show was planned but because of the demand another show was screened. there at the theater, a turn out of 442 people was observed which included standing audience for 434 seats and about 60 could not be accommodated. apart from usa, the film released in selected screens in united kingdom, singapore, germany and australia.


=== home media ===
the dvd of the movie was released by aditya music under its aditya video brand and won the best dvd award for its quality and is considered to be one of the highest sold dvds in tollywood history. after 7 years, star maa renewed the contract by paying an amount of 3.5 crores which was a record price for a 2005 telugu film. the tamil dubbed version nandu was givened the satellite rights to kalaignar tv. the malayalam dubbed version the target was givened the satellite rights to amrita tv.


== dubbed versions and remakes ==
despite the remakes in different languages the film was dubbed and released in tamil, hindi, malayalam, bhojpuri, english, and polish as nandhu, cheetah: the power of one (2013), the target, khiladi bhaiya (2013), the power of one, and poszukiwany respectively.


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
sify.com stated, "the highlight of the film is mahesh babu who looks cool, confident and competent as a hit man with his expressive body language and mannerisms. athadu just about makes it as a slickly packaged entertainer but only for want of a better alternative." indiaglitz gave a review stating "the story sure has splendid potential, but the director does not use them to the hilt simply because he attempts to do too many things almost simultaneously. yet, all things considered, athadu is a good entertainer. the problem is you can't praise it as the best yet cannot rubbish it as being useless. it is somewhere in between with more pluses than minuses." cinegoer.net gave a review stating "true the film gives an image of a hollywood base for the drama. even the taking, screenplay structure and execution of scenes, less talk and more action  all add to this image. but there are elements in this film that only a telugu man can do it originally. that is the love track. and the way trivikram put to view the scenic structure between mahesh babu and trisha is impressive and refreshing."


=== box office ===
the film netted  1 million from 3 screens in chennai in its opening weekend debuting at second position pushing shankar's anniyan down to the third place. it collected approximately 220 million (us$3.1 million) in its total run. the film had a 50 days run in 205 centers and a 100-day run in 38 centres. the film had a 175-day run in sudarshan 35 mm, hyderabad, grossing  1.40 crores from the theater.,


== accolades ==


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
athadu at imdb
athadu at allmovie