aya sawan jhoom ke (transl.the monsoon came dancing) is a 1969 film directed by raghunath jhalani. it became a box office hit. the film stars dharmendra, asha parekh, nazir hussain, nirupa roy, bindu, aruna irani, and rajindernath. the music is by laxmikant pyarelal and the lyrics by anand bakshi. the songs were meaningful and also melodious. # 8 at box-office collection list.


== plot summary ==
housemaid maya(nirupa roy) accidentally kills her master while trying to resist his attempts to molest her. bring hunted by the police, maya decides to leave her son on the doors of a temple. the child is discovered by the temple priest who decides to take the child home and bring him up. just then, a rich man (nasir hussain) and his wife come to the temple and pray to god for granting them a child. hearing them, the temple priest hands over the abandoned child to them and asks them to bring him up as their own child. the couple name the child as jaishankar. when jaishankar grows up, he starts looking after the business of his father.
one day, jaishankar meets and falls in love with aarti (astha parekh) . after successfully wooing her , he agrees to meet with her dad to discuss their marriage. on the way to her house, he ironically runs over her father, killing him instantly. guilt-ridden, he attempts to make amends to look after aarti, her brother, pappu, and sister, mala, but conceals the fact that he was responsible for their father's death. things get worse after aarti not only discovers the truth but also witnesses him getting intimate with a cabaret dancer, rita. then jaishankar is first disowned by his father after the family finds out that he had sired a son from rita, and then subsequently arrested by the police for killing rita. however, it turns out that he is saving his sister's husband rajesh and was being blackmailed by rita for money. in the end, it is revealed that rita's real husband shot her for cheating other people and her greed for money.


== cast ==
asha parekh as aarti
dharmendra as jaishankar 'jai'
ravindra kapoor as rajesh
nazir hussain as lala jugal kishore
rajendra nath as sadhuram sood
nirupa roy as maya
sunder as dr. yudhvir singh
shivraj as aarti's father
laxmi chhaya as rita
bindu as seeta
aruna irani as mala
jalal agha as deepak
dulari as mrs. jugal kishore
madhu apte
keshav rana as lori
narbada shankar as sadhu in the temple
rajan kapoor
brahm bhardwaj as deepak's dad
master shahid as pappu
neena
mac mohan as madman
uma dutt as maya's employer
kartar singh sikh man set in theatre
rirkoo
ramesh bhatia
nazir kashmiri as madho
kumari naaz as sangeeta y. singh


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
aya sawan jhoom ke at imdb