ayee milan ki bela (english: i meet you) is a 1964 indian hindi film directed by mohan kumar. the film was produced by j. om prakash. the music is by shankar jaikishan. the movie has stars; rajendra kumar, saira banu, shashikala and dharmendra (in  a grey character. though many describe his character as a villain, his is an essentially a positive character who is incited by madan puri against the herorajendra kumar ).  the film became a "super hit" at the box office. the film was remade in tamil as oru thaai makkal.


== plot ==
a rich man(gajanan jagirdar) whose wife pushpa is expecting a child, is crestfallen when the nurse (praveen paul) tells him that his wife has given birth to a dead child. fearing that his wife will not be able to bear the news of her child's death,  he is suggested by the nurse to adopt one of the sons of their house maid (sulochana) , who has given birth to twins shyam and ranjeet. on the rich man's fervent pleas,the maid laxmi agrees to give him one of his sons ranjeet. shyam grows up in the village while his twin brother ranjeet grows up in the city in the care of his adopted rich parents.
with passage of time, a grown up  shyam feeds himself and his mother by tilling land in the small village. 
one day, he is told  that a rich person mr chaudhry(nazir hussain)has come to the village and is scheming to usurp land of farmers. however,  on meeting mr chaudhry, shyam realizes that mr chaudhry wants to improve condition of farmers by forming a cooperative which will sell their crops at good prices.shyam joins hands with  mr. choudhry and together they help make lives of farmers better. mr. chaudhry's daughter barkha (saira banu) and shyam fall in love with each other. ranjeet (dharmendra) (shyam's fraternal twins who got separated at birth, returns from overseas, and all are overjoyed to see him back. ranjeet and shyam have a lot in common: both are handsome, dedicated, pleasant and polite; both share the same date of birth; and both also love the same woman, barkha. it is the last similarity that causes friction between the two, so much so that shyam is accused of impregnating another woman, roopa, and charged with stealing money. later, the charges against shyam are proved false. ranjeet also realizes his mistake. he also comes to know that shyam is his fraternal twin.


== cast ==
rajendra kumar as shyam
saira banu as barkha choudhry
dharmendra as ranjit
nazir hussain as mr. choudhry
shashikala as roopa
sulochana latkar as laxmi (shyam's mom)
sunder as munshi sridhar
madan puri as ratanlal
keshav rana as dharampal (ratanlal's henchman)
mumtaz begum as pushpa (ranjeet's mom)
gajanan jagirdar as pushpa's husband and father of ranjeet
praveen paul as the nurse who suggests to pushpa's husband that he present to his wife laxmi's twin son as their new born child.


== soundtrack ==


== filmfare nominations ==
best actor -rajendra kumar
best supporting actor -dharmendra
best supporting actress -shashikala


== references ==


== external links ==
ayee milan ki bela at imdb