baaghi (transl. rebel) is a 2016 indian hindi-language action thriller film directed by sabbir khan and produced by sajid nadiadwala under his banner nadiadwala grandson entertainment. a remake of the 2004 telugu film varsham, with a climax inspired by the 2011 indonesian film the raid: redemption, the film stars tiger shroff and shraddha kapoor in the lead roles and sudheer babu in his hindi debut, with sunil grover in a supporting role.baaghi was released worldwide on 29 april 2016. made on a budget of 370 million (us$5.2 million), the film earned over 1.27 billion (us$18 million) worldwide. later on, it spawned two spiritual sequels, baaghi 2 (2018) and baaghi 3 (2020), thus becoming the first installment in the baaghi film series.


== plot ==
the film starts with martial arts champion raghav shetty kidnapping sia khurana from her film's set in hyderabad and taking her to bangkok. sia's father, p.p. khurana, goes to government offices and the police for help, but no one is ready to assist them since raghav is an influential man. khurana then turns to sia's ex-boyfriend, ranveer 'ronny' pratap singh, who agrees to do so, since he needs money to treat subbu, a mute young boy who is being treated for his vocal chords.
in a flashback, ronny and sia meet on a train. raghav sees sia at the train station and starts to like her. he tells his men to get information about her. ronny visits the martial arts school of a certain guruswamy in kerala. in a letter to guruswamy, ronny's father, samarjit singh, who happens to be his ex-batchmate in the army, explains that ronny is a rebel and asks him to make ronny a good human being. ronny and sia fall in love, and sia gives him a ring she got from her father, asking him always to keep it. raghav asks for sia's hand from khurana, and khurana is so lost by greed when he sees how much money raghav offers for sia. he agrees to hand sia over to raghav, but when he sees that ronny has sia's ring, he realizes she is in love with ronny. he informs raghav, who decides to kill ronny.
ronny beats up raghav's men when they manhandle subbu, who ronny is close to, only for raghav to get him arrested later on. guruswamy tries to persuade raghav, who turns out to be his son, to stop pursuing sia, but raghav poisons and kills him to get him out of the way. ronny is heartbroken to hear of guruswamy's death since he had seen him as a father figure. khurana then creates a misunderstanding between sia and ronny to separate them, which works and the two part ways.
in the present, ronny reaches bangkok and visits raghav's fight club, beating the most potent fighter there to get raghav's attention. the next day, ronny breaks into the house of raghav's right-hand man, biju, and threatens biju's wife at gunpoint, forcing him to reveal sia's location. finding out she was at the hospital, ronny saves sia and escapes with her under both of them being disguised as a doctor and nurse. the two stop at an island on their way back to india, where sia discovers her father's deceit when she sees that ronny is still wearing her ring. the couple reconciles, but raghav and his men attack them. biju shoots ronny, who falls off a cliff.
raghav takes sia back to his place. it is then revealed that ronny is alive. it turns out that biju had used blank bullets in his gun, sparing him as ronny had spared his wife's life earlier. raghav kills biju when biju says that he believes ronny to be right.
ronny storms raghav's building and single-handedly fights off all of the killers and swordsmen in raghav's employ. he reaches raghav, who initially overpowers him, but when raghav reveals that he was the one who murdered guruswamy, ronny becomes enraged and uses guruswamy's signature moves to kill raghav. in the end, ronny, now happily together with sia, becomes the new teacher in guruswamy's school, where a statue of guruswamy now stands.


== cast ==
tiger shroff as ranveer pratap singh a.k.a. ronny
shraddha kapoor as sia khurana
sudheer babu as raghav shetty
sourav chakraborty as biju
shifuji shourya bhardwaj as kailash shetty a.k.a. guruswamy
sunil grover as p. p. khurana, sia's father
kota srinivasa rao as film producer dasanna
buddya sunari magar as refree
sanjay mishra as harry
prashant singh as gopi
aryan prajapati as subbu, a mute little boy who is close to ronnie


== production ==
shroff trained and took up stunt classes for the film. sajid nadiadwala hired a special team of 50 people to keep shroff's look under wraps. the makers did not want his look to be revealed because of his role in the film being distinct from his role in heropanti. telugu actor sudheer babu was signed to play a negative role, making his bollywood debut. shooting for baaghi started on 27 may 2015. the shooting of the film completed on 21 february 2016. the film was extensively shot in india and thailand. soma kerala palace, kochi was shown in the movie as the karma institute (school of guruswamy). song sab tera was shot in the exotic poda island.


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film was composed by meet bros, amaal mallik, ankit tiwari, manj musik and pranaay rijia, while the score was composed by julius packiam. the song lyrics were written by kumaar, abhendra kumar upadhyay, sanjeev chaturvedi, raftaar, sabbir khan and rahul b. seth. the first song of the film, "sab tera" was released on 18 march 2016, which was sung by shraddha kapoor and armaan malik. the second song of the film titled as "let's talk about love", which was sung by raftaar and neha kakkar
was released on 25 march 2016.
the album was released on 29 march 2016, which includes 6 songs.


== box office ==
released on a friday, the film netted 119.4 million, 11.13 crore, and 155.1 million respectively on its first three days, bringing in a total of 38.58 crore net on its opening weekend and meeting its 37 crore production cost. by its seventh day, the film had netted 59.72 crore. baaghi's daily collection peaked at 15.51 crore net on day three and began to decline thereafter, losing 79% of business by the end of the second week. the movie ultimately grossed 106.03 crore from india and 19.89 globally, for a total gross estimate of 125.92 crore, one of the highest-grossing films of shroff's career.


== sequel ==

on 1 may 2017, tiger shroff posted the first look poster of the sequel baaghi 2 on his twitter account. the producer of the film, sajid nadiadwala, collaborated with fox star studios and the film was released under fox star studios and nadiadwala grandson entertainment. the film is directed by ahmed khan. the film was released worldwide on 30 march 2018. a third installment was also announced under the title of baaghi 3, with nadiadwala the producer, khan the director, and shroff in the lead role.


== references ==


== external links ==
baaghi at imdb 
baaghi at bollywood hungama