baba is a 2002 indian tamil-language supernatural action film written and produced by rajinikanth under his banner lotus international and directed by suresh krissna and cinematography by chota k. naidu. with rajinikanth in the lead role, the film's cast included manisha koirala, sujatha, ashish vidyarthi, vijayakumar, nambiar, and sayaji shinde. the original songs and background score were composed by a.r. rahman. baba performed poorly at the box office.the film's story is about a carefree young non-believer of supreme power, baba, who is a reincarnation of a great saint from the himalayas. after several twists and problems caused by corrupt local politicians, baba is taken to mahavatar babaji, whom baba was a follower of in his last life. baba gets tested by the deity to overcome several illusions of the materialistic world and is given seven chances of wishes. how he uses the wishes while developing spirituality and falling into loggerheads with the villains at the same time forms the rest of the story.


== plot ==
the film opens with the birth of baba (rajinikanth), who is a 'baba amsa kumar 
sambhootudu' (a failed saint reincarnated). baba grows up as an atheist and hot-blooded man, but a good samaritan. his lifestyle includes consuming alcohol, smoking beedi, and chewing tobacco. his mother (sujatha) and maternal uncle (m. n. nambiar), for whom baba has great respect and love, are ardent devotees of mahavatar babaji. chamundeswari (manisha koirala) stays in the neighbourhood of baba's residence which often quarrels with baba but eventually falls in love with his style and attitude.
baba involves in a physical feud with the son (riyaz khan) of the state deputy chief minister ippo ramaswamy (ashish vidyarthi) for the former had interfered with the sale of land by his neighbour. ramasamy is the current leader of a party in the ruling coalition. ramaswamy demolishes baba's colony in retaliation for hurting his son. when baba is about to confront ramaswamy, baba's mother urges him to maintain calm and not meet ramaswamy. baba decides to work hard to rebuild the colony and joins as a labourer in his neighbour's shop and earns money. chamundeswari's mother, upon seeing this, threatens chamundeswari with homicide if she does not heed to her words of marrying someone else. chamundeswari is left with no choice and tells baba that she is not willing to marry a daily labourer. then baba realizes that so far, he has been only answerable for his mother. and if he gets married, then he has to live for his wife and kids and would become answerable to them. he feels that prema (love) is maya (illusion) and immediately breaks up with her.
later, a dishevelled sadhu, divyananda bharathi (sayaji shinde), approaches him and tell him that it is time for enlightenment. baba is taken to the himalayas, where he meets mahavatar babaji, who tests him by granting seven mantras (wishes) to baba. he can use these mantras anytime he likes; but unbeknownst to him, if he happened to use the mantras for his own personal gains, the karma of rebirth is bound to follow him forever. baba is sent back to chennai but baffled, he decides to test one of the mantras by wishing a kite to come and fall in his hand. he waits for a few seconds and decides that it was all his illusion, but the kite follows him to his house and falls on his hand. he feels that it is coincidental and tries the second mantra on a different kite to fall on his lap. he goes into his house and closes all the possible entries into the house. but the kite makes its way and falls on his lap.  in the meantime, chamundeeswari learns of baba's origins from his mother that he is a reincarnation of a saint who had disobeyed babaji and that he himself does not know so and tries to patch up with him. baba retorts by saying that he no longer loves her, leaving her heartbroken.
despite the mantras coming true, baba remains skeptical and tests the other two mantras for trivial things. his uncle scolds him for his pointless skepticism in spite of the truth and develops chest pain then. while on his death-bed, his uncle tells baba to use a mantra to renovate his surroundings that will finally instill his belief in babaji, and he dies. as predicted, the use of the fifth mantra causes the government officials to renovate baba's area. baba learns the truth and ends his tryst with alcohol, and reforms himself spiritually. he reserves the remaining two mantras for his mother. however, he uses the sixth mantra to revive a newlywed japanese neighbour fighting for his life due to food poisoning. meanwhile, ramaswamy comes to know about the mantras from baba's two-timing companion (vasu vikram). 
purushottaman (bharat dhabolkar), ramaswamy's boss and the current cm of tamil nadu, wants to become the permanent cm of the state using baba's boons, which baba refuses. he threatens baba's mother and also tries to kill him, but fails. baba's friends annamalai (goundamani), perusu (delhi ganesh), samundi (karunas), kathirika (crane manohar) urge him to use the final wish to become the permanent cm himself as the state would be great under him. but baba uses the last wish on kanthan, an old honest party member of ramasamy, to become the next cm with a single greater majority. then, by the wish, ramasamy's paralysed father (the first leader of the party) wants to prove that the older generation is better as his son is reckless. the elections come, and kanthan becomes cm. ramaswamy calls a tantric guruji (amrish puri), to foil baba's magical powers. guruji asks ramaswamy and purushottaman to bring the chain in baba's neck and his backbone to nullify the effects of the mantras. a fight ensues, with baba's mother getting mortally wounded by ramaswamy and baba himself knocked unconscious by the henchmen. they try to kill him by burning him in a pyre. their attempts however, fail when a temple elephant puts out the fire, with baba regaining consciousness and battering the villains badly. when baba is about to kill ramaswamy and purushottaman, divyananda bharathi stops him. baba's dying mother advises baba to leave the world and ascend to the himalayas and dies in his arms. baba decides to live under babaji's tutelage since he now disdains living in the materialistic world without his mother. but when baba is just about to ascend to the himalayas, the villains kill the loyal cm. baba turns back to fight them as his allies, chamundeswari and the crowd cheer and the saints bless him. the film ends with the tag "to be continued....".


== cast ==

special appearances in alphabetical orderraghava lawrence in a special appearance in "maya maya" song*
ramya krishnan as neelambari
nassar as suryaprakash
prabhu deva in a special appearance in "baba kichu kichu tha" song*
radha ravi as minister of tourism
sarath babu as the father of the girl saved by baba


== production ==
aishwarya rai was first offered the lead female role, but turned down the offer due to unavailability of dates in the film. at the same time manisha koirala replaced her later. the "baba" knife, used by baba in the film was heavily marketed in promotion of the film.


== release ==
this high-budget production was sold at a record price of 17 crore to distributors, but the film yielded a share of 13 crore worldwide. so, rajinikanth volunteered to return almost 25% of the investment. in coimbatore distribution territory, baba was sold for 1.5 crore. this record remained unbroken till chandramukhi another rajnikanth film.


=== reception ===
the film received mixed reviews from critics.
the film was praised for its technical and production values, as well as the performances of the cast, while there was criticism towards the lack of narrative focus in the first half, leading to the film's excessive length and uneven pace. it also left some rajinikanth fans polarized, with many speculating that the film could be a political campaign of sorts for himself. in contrast, others confused about the message this film was intending to convey.the film was received with comments such as "the bloom was off the rose" and that "the gold does not glitter any more". pattali makkal katchi leader s. ramadoss condemned him for smoking and posing with beedis in the film. he was criticised for spoiling tamil youth by glorifying smoking and drinking. pmk volunteers attacked theatres which screened the film baba and usurped film rolls, and burnt it. amidst controversies and negative criticism, rajinikanth kept himself away from acting. despite this, a few novice directors approached him with scripts, all of which he rejected.


== soundtrack ==
a. r. rahman was approached to compose the original songs and background score of the film. he was initially reluctant do accept the offer because of his busy schedule in london, with bombay dreams. however he eventually accepted the film while in ajmer. the songs were recorded in 2002 june. rahman had to record them online as he was in london with the works of bombay dreams. the soundtrack album was released on july 2002 in chennai. according to rahman, he has tried innovations with baba, giving more than the jingoistic music that is a characteristic part of a rajini film.  some of the songs were filmed from europe.in the intro and background fade-outs in ekam eva adhvitheyam, the theme of baba, rahman replicated al capone theme from the movie the untouchables originally composed by the italian composer ennio morricone.a controversy regarding the soundtrack originated when lyricist vairamuthu expressed dissatisfaction over the online recording. rahman defended this, saying, "busy as i was with bombay dreams, it was simply impossible for me to be in chennai. sometimes it is inevitable, in a situation like this, where the reputation and money of somebody else is at stake." rahman also faced criticisms from the film fraternity for not recording the songs in time. another controversy was that dravida kazhagam objected to the lyrics of a song that had to be partially deleted from the film later. they have taken objection to what they have called unfair commentary on periyar e. v. ramasamy and ramaswami's ideology.rahman introduced reena bhardwaj through the song "kichchu tha". this song was reused with different instrumentation and vocals in swades (2004).


=== telugu soundtrack ===


== references ==


== external links ==
baba at imdb