badges of fury (chinese: ; pinyin: b r shntn; jyutping: bat1 ji6 san6 taam3, also known as the one detective) is a 2013 chinese-hong kong action comedy film directed by wong tsz-ming in his directorial debut. the film stars jet li and wen zhang in their third collaboration after ocean heaven and the sorcerer and the white snake. the film was theatrically released on 21 june 2013.


== plot ==
in just 3 days, three cases of smiling murder shock hong kong. as he looks into the homicide, the young detective wang bu er (wen zhang), the police station's reckless buffoon, makes a shocking statement that this is a serial murder.
he and his buddy huang fei hong (jet li) embarks on an investigation full of excitement and unexpected events. huang may appear to be no less muddle-headed than wang, but in reality, he is the real master of kung fu, and would, without fail, at the most crucial moments, help wang get out of sticky situations.
wang initially believes that budding actress liu jin shui (cecilia liu) is the prime suspect, but later, she is found to be innocent. next, he shifts his focus on her sister dai yiyi (ada liu), among others. eventually, wang decides to pose as liu's boyfriend to lure out the murderer. the closer he gets to the truth, the greater the danger he is in.


== cast ==
jet li as huang fei hong (,a homonym/spoof spelling of wong fei-hung), a veteran inspector
wen zhang as wang bu er (, literally "not stupid wang"). a young detective
cecilia liu as liu jin shui (), a female star
michelle chen as angela, huang and wang's superior
ada liu as dai yiyi (), liu's older half-sister
leung siu-lung as liu xing (), liu jin shui's uncle
stephen fung as liu jin shui's cousin
lin shuang as sun ling ()
michael tse as yao yi wei (), a ballroom dancer who is one of the victims of the smiling murder who died during dancing (cameo)
kevin cheng as li tian ci (), movie star who is one of the victims of the smiling murder who died during filming (cameo)
tian liang as zhang liang () a diver who is one of victims of the smiling murder who died during diving (cameo)
collin chou as chen hu (), a wanted criminal (cameo)
wu jing as insurance manager (cameo)
bryan leung as uncle lucky () (cameo)
tong dawei as wang feng (), a real estate manager who is one of the victims of the smiling murder (cameo)
grace huang
oscar chan
stephy tang as female driver (cameo)
huang xiaoming as interpol officer in black (cameo)
raymond lam as gao min (), one of the victims of the smiling murder who died during his second proposal to liu jin shui (cameo)
alex fong as fortune teller (cameo)
zhang zilin as huang fei hong's wife (cameo)
lam suet as taxi driver (cameo)
tin kai-man as party guest (cameo)
josie ho (cameo)
joe cheung as chef (cameo)
ma yili as commissioner (cameo)
wang zhifei as mr. mai
feng danying as ms. zhou


== production ==
badges of fury began filming in july 2012 in hong kong. an accident occurred while filming a car chase scene at sha tin water treatment works where a prop car lost control and flipped over nearly killing the cinematographer and causing nine injuries including 8 men and 1 woman and many people being stuck in the car.


== references ==


== external links ==
badges of fury at imdb
badges of fury at rotten tomatoes