bagavathi is a 2002 indian tamil-language action film written and directed by a. venkatesh, which features vijay and reemma sen in the leading roles.  vadivelu, ashish vidyarthi, jai, k. vishwanath, and yugendran play other supporting roles, while deva composed the music for the film. the movie was released on diwali. the movie was remade in kannada as kashi from village.
it was a commercial success.


== plot ==
bagavathi (vijay) owns a tea shop, while vadivelu (vadivelu), works at his tea shop. bagavathi lives with his younger brother guna (jai). he meets a girl named anjali (reema sen). she ends up appreciating his kindness, and they fall in love. guna has a girlfriend named priya (monica), with whom he secretly develops a physical relationship. guna's love is objected to by priya's father, easwarapandiyan (ashish vidyarthi). bagavathy tries to convince easwarapandiyan to let priya and guna marry, but is humiliated. guna attempts to marry priya without his brother's knowledge, but easwarapandiyan kills guna, as well as anand, who is trying to defend guna.
bagavathi mourns over guna's death. guna, in his last moments, promises he will be with his brother forever. after guna's death, everyone comes to know that priya is pregnant. bagavathi thinks that guna will be reborn again. however, easwarapandiyan attempts to kill the child before birth. bagavathi challenges him, saying the child will touch the earth. in order to do so, ganga (thalaivasal vijay) helps him turn into a gangster. with the help of anjali and vadivelu, bagavathi overcomes all hurdles by easwarapandiyan and manages to protect priya to allow for the safe birth of his brother's child. in the end, bagavathi avenges the death of his brother by killing easwarapandian.


== cast ==


== production ==
the director a. venkatesh selected a newcomer, jai, to play the role of guna after seeing him at jai's uncle, deva's, recording studio  mentioning that the youngster looked like actor vijay. although his role in the film was relatively minimal, he has since gone on to appear in successful films such as chennai 600028, subramaniyapuram and engeyum eppodhum.the film was shot at various locations including chennai, nellore, araku valley, and vishakhapatnam. prior to the title being confirmed as bagavthi, the maker considered the title namma aalu.


== release ==
the film was released in diwali alongside ajith starrer villain. the film was released in malaysia under the title pasupathy. a dubbed version of the film in telugu was prepared and released in late 2005. the film was awarded an 'a' certificate by the indian censor board, owing to its violent scenes.  the film was also simultaneously released in telugu and dubbed in hindi with the same title, which was released in 2006.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack consists of six songs composed by deva. the lyrics were written by vaali, snehan, pa. vijay, kalaikumar, and na. muthukumar.


== references ==


== external links ==
bagavathi at imdb