balwaan (transl.macho) is a 1992 indian hindi-language action film directed by deepak anand.  the film has sunil shetty  in his debut film. divya bharti plays the female lead and danny denzongpa plays the antagonist. the film was a semi-hit at the box office.


== plot ==
arjun singh (sunil shetty) comes from a poor family. he lives in a small and shabby tenement with his mother and sister. he was studying in a college where he falls in love with deepa (divya bharti). one day he attacks a police officer and gets sent to prison for that. deepa bails him from jail with the help of her father (tinnu anand), who is a police commissioner. deepa's father wants arjun to join the police force as he feels that the department needs some honest officers. he joins the police force and gets posted to another city where the original police inspector was killed by the goons. he goes to the city along with his mother and sister. this puts him into conflict with a notorious gangster bhaiji (danny denzongpa). in order to teach arjun a lesson, bhaiji orders people in this community to stop interacting with arjun and his family, and as a result the three are alienated. his sister, and his mother passes away. then bhaiji has arjun captured and chained. but arjun manages to escape, only to find that he has been framed for murder and is arrested by the police.


== cast ==
suniel shetty as arjun singh
divya bharti as deepa sahani
shraddha verma as sapna
anjana mumtaz as arjun's mom
danny denzongpa as bhaiji
ishrat ali as minister
tinnu anand as police commissioner
arun bakshi as police inspector tanya palok
pankaj berry as pankaj,college mate of arjun
avtar gill as acp
vikram gokhale as police inspector
neena gupta as ratna,police inspector rohit wife
dinesh hingoo announcer at fire well
guddi maruti as radha,college friend of deepa
raju shrestha as mukesh,college friend of arjun
mushtaq merchant
ankush mohit
yunus parvez
ghanshyam rohera
raju mavani
kim...  special appearance


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
balwaan at imdb