bangali babu english mem (2014) is an indian romance comedy film directed by ravi kinnagi and released by shree venkatesh films. it is a remake of punjabi movie jatt & juliet.


== cast ==
soham chakraborty as  madhusudan dutta
mimi chakraborty as  riya
biswajit chakraborty  as haranath
laboni sarkar as parboti
abir chatterjee as special appearance (captain bikram)
payel sarkar as cameo appearance (air hostage liza)
supriyo dutta as mr dutta


== plot ==
madhusudan dutta (soham chakraborty), a young guy from kolkata is crazy about marrying a canadian girl to get the citizenship of canada while on the other side riya (mimi chakraborty) a classy modern girl wants to go to canada to study fashion designing. they both first meet at the passport office where madhusudan asks riya to fill his form because his hand was injured which he was pretending because of his lack of english. they both again meet at the airport and they always have fight due to this. riya looks for a nice accommodation where she finds a nice house and while getting money out of the atm, she gets robbed by two thugs. unfortunately, riya has to look for cheaper place where she meets madhusudan again and has to share that apartment with him. a day arrives when jenny a canadian caucasian girl, arrives to the house where riya and madhusudan are living as she is the step-daughter of the house owner. riya asks madhusudan to propose jenny and they both start making plans how to get jenny for madhusudan, but when madhusudan comes to know that jenny is going to africa for social service, he ditches her and poor jenny is left heartbroken. the owner of the house throws both of them out and they work at two different horo parboti restaurants that are run by wife and husband, who are not together now. madhusudan and riya soon come to know that the horo parboti is going to be re-possessed by the bank because of six months unpaid property payments for the loan. madhusudan and riya work out the process of re-joining the husband and wife together so that the loan could be paid off. slowly, madhusudan and riya start falling for each other but both of them don't want to admit it. madhusudan realises that he loves riya when riya's fianc, bikram (abir chatterjee) comes to take riya with him to india for their marriage. finally madhusudan leaves for india with a hope to bring riya back to his life but after watching riya has been married he is left heart broken. after a while, he meets bikram at cinema hall where bikram tells him that riya is still single and madhusudan runs to propose riya and they live happily ever after.


== soundtrack ==


== reactions ==
writing in the times of india, jaya biswas had a generally positive but mixed reaction to the film, saying:

"the best part about the film is its dialogues. the way madhu confidently converses in wrong english is hilarious. the humour appeals to all and comes across as a breath of fresh air amidst parts of boredom. the first half drags a lot."
more negative comments by the reviewer included such statements as "however, there are a few discrepancies in the plot", "no doubt the girl can act, but she too needs to hone her dancing skills a bit.", and "the first half drags a lot."the review closed with the comment: "bangali babu english mem is worth a dekko."the business standard referred to the film as "...a typical bengali rom-com with a new tollywood pair."


== references ==