bapi bari jaa is a 2012 indian bengali romantic comedy film directed by sudeshna roy and abhijit guha. the movie is jointly produced by shree venkatesh films and idea creations, and stars arjun chakrabarty and mimi chakraborty in lead roles with shalmi barman, tista duuta and anindya chatterjee in pivotal roles. the film is about youngsters and the story of the film revolves around a young sheltered man who suddenly discovers life when he comes out on to the streets one day. the movie was released on 7 december 2012.


== plot ==
five childhood friends  bapi, dola, jijo, hasna and riju  are just out of college and hangs out together. bapi, the younger son of a rich jeweller in kolkata happens to be the money contributors for his friends. while bapi joins his family business, other friends are looking out for jobs.  jijo gets into a relationship with hasna. riju thinks that he is into a relationship with a girl five years older than him. one day riju's world was shattered when she introduced riju to her fianc, and calls him her brother. riju got himself drunk, and all the friends left him alone outside the bar. while returning from the pub with dola, bapi realised that he must have got some feelings for dola. one day, when dola came to bapi's house, he asked dola "who is bishwayan da?". they got into an argument and bapi kissed dola. dola freed herself and told that they are just friends, but gave bapi another kiss on his cheek. further, she told that bapi is not manly enough and lacks any mystery in his life. another day bapi's sister-in-law found adult magazines and evidence of masturbation, asks bapi's elder brother to get bapi married.
bapi goes to see his prospective bride, where he meets sheuli, a middle-class girl. sheuli asks bapi if he loves someone else. he confesses that he loves dola. sheuli told that she will help him to get dola, but he must call off the marriage. bapi introduces sheuli to his friends. dola seemed jealous about sheuli and asked bapi that this is not the ideal time to marry. bapi gets a job of a salesman on the advice of sheuli and struggles to impress dola. in the meantime, sheuli and bapi seem to fall in love with each other. dola realises that she loves bapi and wants to be with him. one day bapi went to sheuli's home, where she asks him to stay away. it is seen that sheuli meets her old boyfriend, who returned to the city. dola confessed her love before bapi, and told him not to leave his salesman job.


== cast ==
main charactersarjun chakrabarty as bapi
mimi chakraborty as dola
shalmi barman as sheuli
anindya chatterjee as jijo
tista dutta as hasna
dhruvo as riju
abhrajit chakraborty as biltu
bulbuli panja as biltu's wifeguest appearanceabir chatterjee as bishe da
srijit mukherji as bishwayan da


== music ==

all lyrics are written by prasen (prasenjit mukherjee), chandrani gannguli, anindya chatterjee, srijato; all music is composed by jeet gannguli.


== references ==