barb wire is a 1996 american superhero film based on the dark horse comic book series of the same name. it stars pamela anderson in the titular role, alongside temuera morrison, victoria rowell, xander berkeley, udo kier and steve railsback. brad wyman produced, and david hogan directed from a screenplay by chuck pfarrer and ilene chaiken.
the film was critically panned and was nominated for several golden raspberry awards.


== plot ==
in 2017, during the second american civil war, barb wire owns the hammerhead, a nightclub in steel harbor, "the last free city" in a united states ravaged by the war. she brings in extra cash working as a mercenary and bounty hunter. chief of police willis raids her club. willis's target is fugitive dr. corrina 'cora d' devonshire, a former government scientist with information about a new bioweapon called red ribbon being developed by her former superiors in the congressional directorate. the congressional council has tasked colonel victor pryzer to find dr. devonshire so they can finally end the second civil war by releasing the virus on the united front territories. dr. devonshire hopes to escape to canada in order to make this information public.
devonshire turns up at the hammerhead. she is accompanied by axel hood, a "freedom fighter" whom barb had known and loved at the outbreak of the war, but the two were separated during the conflict. axel is trying to help cora get to canada. they are trying to find a contraband pair of contact lenses that would allow cora to evade the retinal scan identification at the steel harbor airport. the lenses pass through the hands of several lowlifes before also ending up at barb's nightclub.
rather than give the lenses to cora and axel, barb makes a deal with 'big fatso', the leader of a junkyard gang: fatso wants the lenses, which are worth a fortune on the black market, and barb wants a million dollars and an armed escort to the airport, where she plans to get on the plane to canada. but fatso double-crosses barb; when barb, axel and cora show up at the junkyard to make the swap, colonel pryzer and his storm troopers are also there, along with chief of police willis. willis makes a show of arresting barb and cora, but instead of putting handcuffs on barb, he slips her a hand grenade. barb uses the grenade to kill fatso and cause enough confusion to allow barb, axel, cora and willis to pile into barb's armored van and lead the congressionals on a car chase, culminating in a hand-to-hand fight between barb and colonel pryzer on a forklift suspended by crane above the harbor. pryzer falls to his death while barb escapes.
the party makes it to the airport, where barb reveals that she still has the contact lenses. she gives them to cora, and cora and axel get on the plane to canada while willis and barb remain on the rainswept tarmac.


== cast ==
pamela anderson as barbara 'barb wire' kopetski
temuera morrison as axel hood
victoria rowell as dr. corrina 'cora d' devonshire
jack noseworthy as charlie kopetski
xander berkeley as chief alexander willis
udo kier as 'curly'
steve railsback as colonel victor pryzer
mary anna reyes as woman in torture room
andre rosey brown as 'big fatso'
nicholas worth as ruben tannenbaum
clint howard as schmitz
nils allen stewart as jack
henry kingi as 'moe'
mark collver as manny
jennifer banko as 'spike'
loren rubin as willie krebs
peewee piemonte as officer frick
dominiquie vandenberg as officer frack
tony bill as foster
michael russo as mr. santos
shelly desai as sharif
marshall manesh as sheik
john paxton as 'smooth'
neil hunt as 'weasel'
ken fosgren as 'greaseball'
tom lister jr. as bouncer
teo as disc jockey
ai wan as 'china'
diane warshay as maria
candace kita as dancer
diane shay as stripper in dressing room
adriana alexander as redheadin the film, anderson's waist was laced down to 17 inches (43 cm). she did some of her own stunts, although the corset and the heels she wore made fight scenes very challenging.


== reception ==
barb wire generally received negative reactions by critics and was a box office bomb. it holds a 27% approval rating on rotten tomatoes based on 37 reviews (10 positive, 27 negative), with the consensus stating that "barb wire could've been fun camp, but pamela anderson can't deliver her lines with any dramatic or comedic impact". roger ebert pointed out that the film's plot was identical to that of casablanca and derided the low-brow attempts at sensuality, but praised the cast and crew's approach to the material: "the filmmakers must have known they were not making a good movie, but they didn't use that as an excuse to be boring and lazy. barb wire has a high energy level, and a sense of deranged fun." he gave it two and a half stars. similarly to ebert, owen gleiberman of entertainment weekly commented on the film's aping of the casablanca plot and its "teasing, hollow 'naughtiness'", but further said that the film is lacking in energy. he gave it a c.


=== awards and nominations ===
barb wire would later rank in the listed bottom 20 of the stinkers' "100 years, 100 stinkers" list, which noted the 100 worst movies of the 20th century, at #19.


=== box office ===
the film was a box-office failure, only grossing $3,794,000 in the united states.


== soundtrack ==

an official soundtrack was released in 1996.


== video game ==
gt interactive announced that they would be publishing a video game based on the film for the playstation, saturn, pc, and macintosh in january 1997. the developer was cryo interactive. the gameplay was said to be similar to resident evil, with a single-player campaign and a two-player deathmatch mode. it was never released.


== references ==


== external links ==
barb wire at imdb
barb wire at allmovie
barb wire at rotten tomatoes
barb wire at box office mojo
sci-fi universe article from may 1996 at pamwatch.com