baton baton mein (transl.by the way) is a 1979 indian romantic comedy film, produced and directed by basu chatterjee. the film stars amol palekar and tina munim in leading roles. david, pearl padamsee, asrani and ranjit choudhary appear in supporting roles.
the film's music is by rajesh roshan. at least three of the four songs became quite popular. the movie was a critical and commercial success.
the popular song "na bole tum na" is a rendition from the american civil war song "when johnny comes marching home".


== plot ==
rosie perreira (pearl padamsee) is an overly anxious widow, living with her violin-obsessed son, sabby (ranjit chowdhry) and a lovely daughter, nancy (tina munim) whom she would like to marry a wealthy young man. her brother and neighbour, tom (david) introduces a young eligible tony braganza (amol palekar) to nancy on the 9:10 am western railway local train from bandra to churchgate. tom also asks nancy to introduce tony to rosie, which she does. rosie is initially apprehensive about him as he only drawing a mere rs.300/- compared to nancy's rs.700/-, but soon changes her mind when she finds out that after his probationary period he will draw a monthly pay of rs.1000/-. nancy and tony are permitted to meet and both eventually fall in love. while nancy has a past where she was betrayed by a boy whom she loved, she still likes tony. tony is hesitant, and this is what costs him nancy's love, as rosie feels that he will not come through with the marriage. and soon rosie starts looking elsewhere for a son-in-law. nancy does not like this, but she at first accepts whatever her mom wants. nancy and tony have a fight and stop meeting each other on the train as well. when tom comes to know about this, he speaks to tony's dad. tony's dad tells tony that if he is still reluctant to make any commitments, he should tell nancy about it. so nancy and tony meet each other and nancy tells him that she will never meet him again. it is then that tony feels that he actually loves nancy and cannot live without her. then nancy also confesses her love for him and they marry.


== cast ==
amol palekar as tony braganza
tina munim as nancy perreira
asrani as francis fernandes
david as tom uncle
leela mishra as philomena aunty
pearl padamsee as rosie perreira
arvind deshpande as mr. braganza
piloo j. wadia as mrs. braganza
ranjit chowdhry as sabby perreira
uday chandra as henry
shobhini singh


== music ==
all music was composed by rajesh roshan and the lyrics were by yogesh and amit khanna. music for the song na bole tum, na maine kuch kaha is lifted from johnny, i hardly knew ye by clancy brothers & tommy makem.


== references ==


== external links ==
baton baton mein at imdb