be a girl is the third album by swedish alternative rock band the wannadies. it was released in 1994 and reached number thirty-four on the swedish albums chart. the entire album was produced by nille perned with the exception of the first single "love in june" which was produced by micke herrstrm. the album was supported by the swedish national council for cultural affairs
be a girl includes the singles "love in june", "you and me song", "might be stars" and "how does it feel?". receiving positive reviews the album was originally released as a cd and lp in sweden in november 1994. the artwork was designed by lars sundh with photography by irmelie krekin.
the album was released by the rca subsidiary indolent records in the uk in august 1995. the album received a major boost when the single "you and me song" was featured on the soundtrack to baz luhrmann's 1996 film, romeo + juliet. the hit song was subsequently re-released in 1996 and reached #18 on the uk singles chart and was also included on international editions of the group's following album bagsy me.


== reception ==
be a girl received positive reviews from the majority of critics. jason damas writing for allmusic calls the album "classic britpop from beginning to end -- a life-affirming album that reminds us why rock & roll is so great". damas notes that musically the group has developed from their previous release remarking that "the guitars are noticeably louder on this disc, and the pace barely relents before "kid," a gut-wrenching power-ballad".


== track listing ==
all tracks are written by wiksten, s. schnfeldt, f. schnfeldt, karlsson, bergmark.


== personnel ==
the wannadies arepr wiksten
fredrik schnfeldt
stefan schnfeldt
gunnar karlsson
christina bergmarkadditional musicians, technical and visualnille perned - additional guitar, programming, ambient sounds
kent norberg - guest vocals ("do it all the time")
lars frykholm, svein h. martinsen, tony bauer - strings ("dreamy wednesdays")
nille perned - producer (all tracks except "love in june")
micke herrstrm - producer ("love in june")
david mllerstedt and nille perned - recording (all tracks except "love in june")
adam kviman, micke herrstrm, thomas petersson - recording ("love in june")
nille perned - mixing (all tracks except "love in june")
stefan glaumann - mixing ("love in june")
peter dahl - mastering
irmelie krekin - cover photography
steve "mr butter" double - group photography
lars sundh - design
t+cp - design translation


== references ==