beeba boys is a 2015 canadian crime thriller film written and directed by deepa mehta. it stars randeep hooda as jeet johar, a loving single father, a dutiful son, a proud, observant sikh and a ruthless gangster managing a team of stylish, charismatic but brutal and unforgiving young men. the film is a fictional take based on real incidents, including bindy johal.


== plot ==
jeet johar, is a ruthless indo-canadian gangster living in vancouver, b.c. he and his gang take on the ironic name of "beeba" (which means good) boys and dress in stylish, colourful suits. jeet is irreverent, picking a feud with the much older robbie grewal, who deals in drugs and weapon smuggling. he shoots lucky, a man who works for grewal, for selling drugs on his turf. as a result, jeet is arrested and forced to stand trial for lucky's murder.
while in prison jeet meets nep, a failed wannabe kidnapper who ingratiates himself to jeet by beating up some white supremacists. jeet also becomes attracted to a blonde juror serving on his trial. he is eventually declared not guilty of the crime of lucky's murder. out of prison he introduces himself to katya drobot, the blonde juror, and immediately installs her in a penthouse in a hotel he owns. he also has his crew contact nep and tells him that in order to gain his favour he must do something to anger grewal. unsure of what to do nep contacts grewal, whom he is secretly working for, planning to double-cross jeet. grewal suggests that nep kidnap his daughter, choti. choti goes along with the plan, jeet is impressed and nep officially becomes a beeba boy.
for a while things run smoothly, however jeet becomes cocky and hijacks some of grewal's merchandise and then attempts to kill grewal. nep, aware of the plan, is able to warn grewal in time to save his life. however, this casts suspicion that there is a mole inside jeet's roster. manny, one of jeet's beeba boys, takes nep with him to shake down one of grewal's men. the man easily gives up nep as the mole, but then shoots manny and lights him on fire. as jeet is trying to figure out how members of his gang keep being murdered katya inadvertently reveals that nep was with manny when he died. jeet takes nep for a drive, intending to kill him, but they are pulled over by the police and nep takes the blame for jeet's illegal gun.
more and more men from jeet's organization are murdered. they retaliate by killing more of grewal's men, but both parties end up wounded. the apartment where katya is staying is eventually raided, as it is unprotected, and katya is murdered. unsure of what to do jeet listens to his mother's suggestion that perhaps it would be best for the family to return to india.
before going jeet asks nep to meet him at a nightclub. nep goes to the club and the two have a conversation where nep reveals that he was in fact not working for grewal, but was part of an undercover sting operation to take down grewal who then asked him to go undercover to take down jeet to prove his loyalty. nep tells jeet that he has wire taps of jeet talking about his crimes, but no recordings of grewal ordering him to kill jeet as he uses intermediaries.
loud gunshots are heard in the club and everyone flees. nep runs to grewal's waiting car and tells him that he has killed jeet. grewal then shoots nep and pushes him out of his car intending to tie up loose ends. as he pushes nep out of the car, jeet jumps in, revealing that nep never shot him. he tells grewal that nep was an undercover cop and the best they can do is to turn themselves in. surrounded by the police grewal allows jeet and his daughter to exit the car to surrender themselves. however, unable to face the possibility of going to jail for his crimes he exits the car and shoots jeet, killing him, and is himself killed by the police.


== cast ==
randeep hooda as jeet johar
ali kazmi as guri
sarah allen as katya drobot
gulshan grover as robbie grewal
waris ahluwalia as manny
paul gross as jamie
dileep rao as kash sood
ali momen as nep
steve dhillon as harry
gabe grey as lovely
jag bal as jazz
balinder johal as mummyji
david suzuki as himself (cameo)


== release ==
beeba boys premiered at the 2015 toronto international film festival. the first trailer was released on 29 july 2015 as part of the tiff festival marketing.the film was released in theatres on 16 october 2015.


== reception ==
on review aggregator rotten tomatoes, the film has a 33% approval rating, with an average rating of 5.14/10 based on 12 reviews.the globe and mail gave a negative review of the film, noting its "great premise... repeatedly dragged down by the director, her script and her cast."the south asian post, an indo-canadian weekly based in vancouver, published a scathing review of the film stating that the filmmaker tries "to get all the ingredients into this recipe: gangster threatening rival, gangster going to jail, gangster in court, gangster courting his moll, all stirred together with a couple of cultural scenes, and voila the souffle. unfortunately, the pieces do not sum to a whole greater than its parts." 


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
beeba boys at imdb
beeba boys at rotten tomatoes