before midnight is a 2013 american romantic drama film directed by richard linklater, who co-wrote the screenplay with ethan hawke and julie delpy. the sequel to before sunrise (1995) and before sunset (2004), it is the third installment in the before trilogy. the film follows jesse (hawke) and cline (delpy), now a couple, as they spend a summer vacation in greece with their children.
linklater, hawke, and delpy began developing a third film in 2011, wishing to replicate the nine-year gap between the first two installments. principal photography began in august 2012, and took place entirely on the peloponnese coast in southern greece, including the kardamyli home once owned by author patrick leigh fermor. like its predecessors, before midnight has a minimal plot, with considerable screentime devoted to extended conversations between the characters. 
before midnight premiered at the sundance film festival on january 20, 2013. it began a domestic limited release on may 24, 2013, and went on general release on june 14, 2013. it grossed $23 million worldwide, becoming the highest-grossing film in the trilogy. it received widespread critical acclaim, particularly for its exploration of romance and age, its screenplay, linklater's direction, and acting performances. the film garnered many accolades and was nominated for the academy award for best adapted screenplay, the writers guild of america award for best adapted screenplay, and the golden globe award for best actress  motion picture comedy or musical for delpy.


== plot ==
nine years have passed since before sunset, and 18 years since before sunrise. jesse and cline have become a couple and parents to twin girls. jesse struggles to maintain his relationship with his teenage son, hank, who lives in chicago with his mother, jesse's ex-wife. jesse is now a successful novelist, while cline is at a career crossroads, considering a job with the french government. after hank spends the summer with jesse and cline on the greek peloponnese peninsula, jesse experiences a disconnect with hank when he drops him off at the airport to fly home and reflects on his inability to be a good father to him.
the couple discuss their concerns about hank, and then about cline's career. over dinner they talk more about love and life with friends. two of the friends staying with them have prepaid for a hotel room for jesse and cline so that they can have a night alone. while walking to the hotel, the couple reminisce about their first meeting and wonder whether they would still be attracted to each other if they were strangers.
after reaching the hotel and checking in, they begin to get intimate and prepare to have sex but are interrupted by a brief phone call from hank, who seems to have bonded with cline more than he has with jesse. the couple eventually have a fierce argument, expressing fears about their present and future together. among other issues, jesse wants them to consider moving to chicago so he can be closer to hank, which cline thinks will cost her any chance of a career outside her family. in the heat of the argument, cline tells jesse she no longer loves him.
cline leaves their room and sits alone in the hotel's outdoor restaurant. jesse joins her and jokes that he is a time traveler (referencing their first meeting) bringing her a letter from her 82-year-old self, describing this night as one of the best of their lives. unamused, cline says their fantasies will never match the imperfect reality. jesse proclaims his love, saying he does not know what else she could want. after a moment, cline joins in jesse's joke, and the two reconcile.


== cast ==


== production ==
richard linklater, ethan hawke, and julie delpy had all discussed doing a sequel to before sunset (or the third in a trilogy). in november 2011, hawke said that he, delpy and linklater

"have been talking a lot in the last six months. all three of us have been having similar feelings, that we're kind of ready to revisit those characters. there's nine years between the first two movies and, if we made the film next summer, it would be nine years again, so we started thinking that would be a good thing to do. so we're going to try and write it this year."
in june 2012, hawke confirmed that the sequel to before sunset would be filmed that summer. soon after, delpy denied filming would take place that year. but by august 2012, numerous reports emerged from messenia, greece, that the film was being shot there.the completion of filming the sequel, titled before midnight, was announced on september 5, 2012. linklater said that, after ten weeks of writing and rehearsing, the film was made in fifteen days for less than $3 million. he intended to take it to a film festival in early 2013.


== release ==
before midnight premiered on january 20, 2013, at the 2013 sundance film festival. it had its international premiere out of competition at the 63rd berlin international film festival.the film opened to general audiences on may 24, 2013, at five theaters in new york, los angeles, and austin, texas. it was released wide in 897 theaters on june 14, 2013.


=== box office ===
the film grossed $8,110,621 domestically and $15,141,309 overseas, for a worldwide gross of $23,251,930.


=== critical reception ===
like the previous entry of the trilogy, before midnight received widespread critical acclaim. rotten tomatoes gives the film a score of 98% based on reviews from 203 critics, with an average rating of 8.7/10. the site's consensus is: "building on the first two installments in richard linklater's well-crafted before trilogy, before midnight offers intelligent, powerfully acted perspectives on love, marriage, and long-term commitment." metacritic gives the film a score of 94 out of 100, based on reviews from 41 critics, indicating "universal acclaim". it was listed as the third-best film of the year after 12 years a slave and gravity. it was the second-best reviewed film of 2013 according to rotten tomatoes, after alfonso cuarn's gravity.according to total film's philip kemp,

"as with its two predecessors  and with the films of french new wave director ric rohmer, presiding deity of this kind of cinemamidnight's essentially a film about people talking. but when the talk's this good, this absorbing and revealing and witty and true, who's going to complain?... [it's a] more-than-worthy, expectation-exceeding chapter in one of modern cinema's finest love stories. as honest, convincing, funny, intimate and natural as its predecessors."
perry seibert of allmovie also praised the film, writing: "the screenwriting trio fill the movie with long, discursive conversations (there are only two scenes in the first 20 minutes) that feel utterly improvised when they are performed, but are far too deftly structured to be anything other than the work of consummate artists." eric kohn, from indiewire, gave the film a rave review, adding it to his list of top 10 films of 2013. he wrote that "with before midnight, richard linklater has completed one of the finest movie trilogies of all time."


== accolades ==
^[i]  each date is linked to the article about the awards held that year.


=== top ten lists ===
according to metacritic, the film appeared on the following critics' top 10 lists of 2013.

the a.v. club film critics named "the fight" scene the scene of the year.


== footnote ==


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
"one couple - nearly 20 years - all before midnight", npr, may 19, 2013
official screenplay at sony pictures classics
before midnight on facebook
before midnight at imdb
before midnight at allmovie
before midnight at box office mojo
before midnight at metacritic
before midnight at rotten tomatoes
the before trilogy: time regained an essay by dennis lim at the criterion collection