bells of coronado is a 1950 american trucolor western film directed by william witney starring roy rogers, trigger the horse, and dale evans.


== plot ==
the mine owner of the el coronado mime is ambushed on the road into town by thieves, who steal a wagon full of uranium ore. the owner is found by linemen of the coronado light & power company, but dies at the town's doctor's office before regaining consciousness.
the insurance company who has insured the ore, hires roy to find out whether the wagon accidentally went off the road and if the ore fell into the coronado dam reservoir. roy goes undercover. with the help of the town's doctor who roy has known for years, he gets a job as a lineman, working for the power company, which supplies electricity to the mine.
the thieves tie up the mine workers and try to steal a second wagon load of uranium, but roy gives chase and is able to get the ore away from the thieves. the thieves make a second attempt and steal the second load of ore after it had been taken to the warehouse. roy finds out that the uranium will be delivered to a dry lake bed where a foreign government is going to land an airplane to pick up the uranium. roy has to rush to try to stop the plane from taking off with the uranium.


== cast ==
roy rogers as roy rogers
trigger as roy's horse
dale evans as pam reynolds
pat brady as sparrow biffle
grant withers as craig bennett
leo cleary as dr. frank harding
clifton young as ross
robert bice as jim russell
stuart randall as sheriff
john hamilton as mr. linden, insurance company official
edmund cobb as rafferty
eddie lee as shanghai, the cook
rex lease as shipping company foreman
lane bradford as shipping smuggler
foy willing as foy
riders of the purple sage as power co. linemen / musicians


== production ==
director william witney remains a favorite of director quentin tarantino. in a the new york times interview, tarantino spoke eloquently about witney's prowess as a director, specifically mentioning witney's work with roy rogers programmers. he detailed how witney gradually moved rogers into more naturalistic costumes such as jeans and flannel shirts, and how occasionally the camera would follow rogers' horse trigger for much of a film, going off and having adventures with other animals before returning to rogers. tarantino and a reporter screened witney's roy rogers movie the golden stallion together during the aforementioned interview.


== soundtrack ==
"save a smile for a rainy day" (written by sid robin and foy willing)
"got no time for the blues" (written by sid robin and foy willing)
"bells of coronado" (written by sid robin and foy willing, spanish lyrics by aaron gonzlez)


== references ==


== external links ==
bells of coronado at imdb
bells of coronado at allmovie
bells of coronado at the tcm movie database
bells of coronado at the american film institute catalog
bells of coronado is available for free download at the internet archive