bemisal (english: unparalleled, or, unprecedented) is a 1982 drama film produced by debesh gosh and directed by hrishikesh mukherjee. the film stars amitabh bachchan, vinod mehra, raakhee, deven verma, aruna irani and om shivpuri. the music was by r.d. burman.
it is a remake of  uttam kumar's bengali classic ami se o shakha (1975), which was also based on the bengali story of the same name by ashutosh mukherjee. when a deprived boy, brought up in a privileged family and indebted for virtually everything he has, lands in a perplexing situation, life seems unfair to him. there are very few who actually appreciate benevolence showered on them. when it comes to repay such debt, many of us try to find excuses to avoid the difficult situation. but the protagonist of this movie is a noble individual, an ideal hero, who knows that everything he has in life, is owed to a family and when he finds himself in a situation where he has to give up his love and profession, he doesn't look back. the film was declared a disaster by box office of india. but over the years, it has attained cult following and is considered a classic.
this was the last movie hrishikesh mukherjee did with amitabh bachchan as a director. however, their last venture together was coolie (1983 hindi film) where hrishikesh mukherjee was the editor.


== plot ==
dr. sudhir roy (amitabh bachchan) and dr. prashant chaturvedi (vinod mehra) meet ms. kavita goel (raakhee) on a holiday and start meeting her regularly. though he himself was interested in kavita, sudhir recommends prashant to her for marriage. when she asks why he himself can't marry her, sudhir narrates his flashback.
sudhir was the second son of a poor school teacher and hopes that his big brother would get a job and provide for them. but when his big brother becomes mentally ill and his father dies, he resorts to petty thieving. when police catch him, the magistrate recognizes him and adopts him. sudhir grows up along with the magistrate's son prashant and receives same education and becomes a pediatrician. now he tells her that he can't marry her on medical grounds as his brother was a psychiatric patient and he has a criminal background.
kavita and prashant marry and prashant leaves for america for higher studies, while sudhir stays in bombay to take care of the magistrate and kavita. after coming back, prashant starts a medical practice and charges more money from patients, especially to do illegal abortions. sudhir tries to reason with him, but he wouldn't listen. one day, prashant's patient dies during an abortion and he gets arrested. sudhir tells police that he was the actual culprit and changes all hospital records to prove that. in return, he takes the word of prashant and kavita to use medical profession to serve people, not to earn money. they give him their word and do exactly the same. sudhir gets a nine-year sentence and loses his medical registration.
after nine years, kavita and prashant welcome sudhir from jail along with their son.


== cast ==
amitabh bachchan as dr. sudhir roy/adhir roy(brothers)
vinod mehra as dr. prashant chaturvedi
raakhee as kavita goel/mrs. chaturvedi
a.k. hangal as dr. ramnarayan goel
om shivpuri as magistrate chaturvedi
deven verma as hiralal
sheetal as ruby dutt
anjan srivastav as doctor
goga kapoor as ruby's father
aruna irani as nandani malhotra
asit sen (actor) as dr.agarwal
pratima devi as dr. goel's sister
master mayur as young sudhir
khushbu sundar as meena (baby khushbu)
master vikas as boy child patient
harindranath chattopadhyay as party guest


== production ==


=== filming ===
some scenes of bemisal were shot in kashmir valley like in sonmarg, pahalgam. bemisal was one of the last films to be shot in kashmir before the advent of militancy.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the film was composed by r. d. burman and the lyrics were penned by anand bakshi. singers like lata mangeshkar, kishore kumar and suresh wadkar lent their voices for the songs of the film. the soundtrack has 4 songs and 2 instrumental versions. the songs are even popular today with the masses. the soundtrack was released in 1982.


== references ==


== external links ==
bemisal at imdb