beyond skyline is a 2017 american science fiction action film written, co-produced and directed by liam o'donnell in his directorial debut. it stars frank grillo, bojana novakovic, jonny weston, iko uwais, callan mulvey, yayan ruhian, pamelyn chee, betty gabriel, and antonio fargas. it is a sequel to the 2010 film skyline, set concurrently with the events of the first film.
the film was released on december 15, 2017 in the united states by vertical entertainment. unlike its critically panned predecessor, beyond skyline received mixed reviews, with several critics calling it an improvement over the original.


== plot ==
taking place at the same time as skyline, mark corley, a los angeles police detective, helps his estranged son, trent, out of jail just as an alien invasion begins. the entire population of the city is sucked into various spaceships by a blue light. mark leads a group of surviving humans through underground subway tunnels to escape, though most of the humans are killed or abducted, one by one. the survivors  mark, trent, transit operator audrey, and a homeless man known only as "sarge", who is immune to the blue light due to his blindness  escape to the marina following the city's nuclear destruction, only to be abducted into the alien flagship by a towering alien tanker.
on board the spaceship, mark tries to find his son and storms his way into various chambers, where he meets up with survivor elaine and her transformed boyfriend jarrod (from the first film). elaine explains that jarrod retained control of his mind despite being transformed into a bio-mechanical alien soldier. though elaine is three months pregnant, her pregnancy has accelerated and she gives birth to a daughter.
elaine dies during the delivery, and mark and jarrod team up to destroy the alien ship by setting alien explosives inside the ship's control systems. when jarrod is killed fighting the alien leader, mark rescues audrey but is too late to save his son.
trent has his brain taken and placed in another alien bio-mechanical machine creature. sarge is badly wounded when he defends the baby from an alien. the dying jarrod destroys the ship, which crashes in rural laos.
mark, audrey, sarge and the baby escape from the spaceship which starts to repair itself. sarge dies from his wounds shortly after the group meets sua and his sister kanya, who belong to a drug cartel and fight against both aliens and local rogue ex-policemen bandits. 
as they trek through the jungle, the group discovers that the human baby grows at an accelerated rate, from an infant into a three-year-old in just one day. sua and kanya lead mark, audrey, and the baby to a hidden human resistance hideout and drug processing facility located in local ruins. in addition, the leader of the rogue policemen huana intercepts them but is disarmed and captured by sua.
harper, a medical officer and former drug chemist, examines the baby girl and learns about her unique dna. harper believes her blood may be the key to defeating the aliens due to her evolving dna. using the child's blood and recovered alien technology, harper develops a serum he believes will free the bio-mechanical soldiers from alien control and restore their human personality. though sua insists on killing all the bio-mechanical soldiers, mark convinces sua to allow him to save trent. 
while on a patrol, kanya encounters a four-legged tanker alien and sacrifices herself by luring it into an old minefield left over from the vietnam war. though she destroys it, she unwittingly gives away their location to the alien ships searching for the human newborn child. they converge on the human base. 
during the resulting battle between the aliens and the humans several members of the human resistance are killed, including harper. mark enters a grounded alien ship where he uses harper's serum to turn the mind-controlling blue light into a red light that frees the mind-controlled bio-mechanical soldiers. before he can deploy it, the alien leader and his horde of alien warriors attacks the human resistance and rips out the cannon containing the light. sua frees a jailed huana on the condition he fights for the resistance. mark, audrey, sua and huana then make a last stand to fight back the aliens. though the four fight off hoards of aliens, huana loses two arms and a leg during the fight.
trent, his mind restored after encountering his father, fights back inside a giant alien tanker. while the alien leader is busy fighting trent, the child fixes the cannon which trent uses to kill the alien leader and release the red light freeing the bio-mechanical soldiers. with earth saved, audrey names the girl rose after mark's deceased wife.
ten years later, rose, now a fully-grown adult, has taken control of an alien ship, and alien trent is her second-in-command and adoptive brother. rose leads freed bio-mechanical soldiers and humans in an assault on the other alien ships around the moon, including the mothership.


== cast ==
frank grillo as mark corley, a detective, trent's father, and rose's adoptive father
bojana novakovic as audrey, an la transit worker
jonny weston as trent corley, marks estranged son and rose's adoptive brother
callan mulvey as harper, a doctor of the human resistance
iko uwais as sua, the leader of an underground human resistance
pamelyn chee as kanya, the sister of sua
yayan ruhian as huana, a militia leader
betty gabriel as jones, an la cop
antonio fargas as sarge, a blind homeless man
jacob vargas as garcia, a police officer and friend of mark
lindsey morgan as cpt. rose, leader of the resistance, mark's adoptive daughter, and trent's adoptive sister
samantha jean as elaine, a captive woman and the biological mother of rose (originally played by scottie thompson in the previous skyline film)
tony black as jarrod in a flashback. (originally played by eric balfour in the previous skyline film)


== production ==
in november 2014, variety announced that iko uwais would join the cast, alongside frank grillo, bojana novakovic, and yayan ruhian. liam odonnell wrote the script for the film, also wrote the script for the first film, will now direct as well as produce with greg and colin strause serving as producers also.  the strause brothers were the directors of the first film, skyline. matthew chausse will also produce. uwais and ruhian will also serve as fight choreographers on the film.the film's visual effects and production were done by hydraulx.


=== filming ===
principal photography began in december 2014, with shooting in yogyakarta and batam, indonesia. and toronto, ontario, canada. the finale of the film was shot in the indonesian prambanan temple complex, though the script suggests that it is located in laos.


== release ==
the first film had a pg-13 rating but the sequel was given an r rating by the mpaa. on alien day 2017, set photos were released to show what the aliens in beyond skyline looked like for the sequel. the first trailer was released on august 16, 2017. the film premiered at sitges film festival october 8, 2017. the film went on to screen at several  genre film festivals including toronto after dark, trieste science+fiction, austin other worlds, boston sci-fi film festival, rio grind vancouver, and was the closing night film at the inaugural cinepocalypse in chicago on november 9. beyond skyline was released on vod and digital on december 15, 2017, and on dvd and blu-ray on january 8, 2018.


== sequel ==

a third and final film, skylines, again directed by o'donnell and produced by the strause brothers, was released on december 18, 2020.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
as of december 2020, the film holds a 67% approval rating on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, based on 21 reviews with an approval rating of 5.50 out of 10. on metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 46 out of 100, based on 8 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".


== references ==


== external links ==
beyond skyline at imdb