bhadra  is a 2005 indian telugu-language action film directed by debutant boyapati srinu. the film features ravi teja and meera jasmine in the lead roles while arjan bajwa, prakash raj and pradeep rawat play supporting roles. 
it turned out to be a huge success at the box office and became one of the biggest hits in ravi teja's career.
it has been dubbed in hindi as badla and in malayalam as brahmam. the film was later remade into tamil as saravana, with silambarasan  & jyothika;  in kannada as gaja, with darshan & navya nair; in bengali as josh  with jeet & srabanti malakar; and in bangladeshi as bhalobeshe morte pari (2010) with shakib khan & sahara.


== plot ==
bhadra (ravi teja) and raja (arjan bajwa) are the thickest of friends. bhadra notices raja's sister anu (meera jasmine) in a video-recorded call and gets attracted to her instantly. after some days, the story moved to the engagement of bhadra's sister (revathi). the house is full of joy and laughter, awaiting bhadra's return from college. however, when bhadra returns, the family members are shocked. he has brought home distraught and frightened anu, whom he introduces as his friend.
the marriage preparations continue, with everyone wondering who anu is. bhadra's uncle, however, cannot control his emotions. he wants his daughter to marry bhadra, and is afraid anu will spoil this. eventually, bhadra's uncle confronts him about anu. anu gets upset and an argument ensues. later, as bhadra and anu go to a restaurant to eat, a gang comes. bhadra chases them for a while and beats all of them up. realizing he has left anu behind, bhadra returns to the restaurant. however, anu is not there. frightened, he was walking on road where he escaped from accident saved by his father (murali mohan). finally, bhadra's father forces him to tell them what is going on. then a flashback begins.
when raja visits his home village, bhadra visits along with him. anu, who returns from london, is impressed by bhadra, who continually impresses her based on her tastes. he gets along well with raja's and anu's family. meanwhile, bhadra convinces them that he would make a prospective groom for anu.
anu's family, mainly her brother surendra (prakash raj) and cousin, are involved in regional gangs in their village. when anu takes bhadra to the temple for a visit without surendra's knowledge, a rival gang member group is attacked by anu's cousin's group members, and one member of the rival group gets hold of anu and threatens to kill her. in a swift action of bravery and skill, bhadra knocks down the rival group member.
after this incident, surendra gives bhadra a talk about why things are so violent in the village. he explains how he is a master's degree holder from a prestigious university (bits pilani) and how his wife is also a master's degree holder. unfortunately, due to the nature of the villages, the rivalry is deadly and fatal. he ultimately says that even though the villages are violent, he will remain a noble person with high ideals.
after a few days though, in the most ungrateful manner and a show cowardice, the rival gang fights with fierce brutality, and the rival gang leader veerayya (pradeep rawat) murders raja's entire family except anu. bhadra makes the promise to surendra that he will take up the responsibility of anu and that he will eventually marry her. in the process, he also becomes a rival of veerayya as he kills his younger brother tulasi (subbaraju) to protect anu. when veerayya finds out that tulasi was killed by bhadra, he decides to kill him instead of anu.
meanwhile, surendra's men trace anu and bring her to bhadra's home. feeling that she is not safe anymore here, bhadra plans to send her abroad. anu is not happy with his decision as she loves him. on the day anu is supposed to leave to london, she meets bhadra and raja's friend at the airport. the girl tells anu about bhadra's devotion for her. she also knows that they chose bhadra as anu's bridegroom before her family was killed. she realizes she cannot leave bhadra, and leaves the airport. she manages to find bhadra, who is fighting the villains. after he defeats veerayya, bhadra and anu embrace. before veerayya can kill bhadra, one of surendra's henchmen kills him. then the movie ends.


== cast ==


== production ==
boyapati srinivas, cousin of posani krishna murali and erstwhile assistant director of muthyala subbaiyah had directed this film. the script was narrated to dil raju who immediately okayed the script and started production of the film. firstly script went to allu arjun but due to some reasons didn't go then jr. ntr and prabhas were also considered for the lead roles. finally, ravi teja got selected as hero. the film was made in a moderate budget of 5 to 6 crores.


== soundtrack ==
music was scored by devi sri prasad and released by aditya music.


== remakes ==
the film was later remade into tamil as saravana, with silambarasan  & jyothika;  in kannada as gaja, with darshan & navya nair; in bengali as josh  with jeet & srabanti malakar; and in bangladeshi as bhalobeshe morte pari (2010) with shakib khan & sahara.


== reviews ==
idlebrain wrote:"bhadra is an average formula film, which runs on the strengths of ravi teja". fullhyd wrote:"bhadra is another version of the kind of chug-a-lug entertainment that made idiot and amma nanna o tamil ammayi worthy of a mention in conversations that are going nowhere". sify wrote:"the basic problem of bhadra is that it is a poor clone of okkadu and there is hardly anything new in presentation and packaging". indiaglitz wrote:"the problem for bhadra is tries to be masala film among masala films ---- it incorporates all the big elements". telugucinema wrote:"bhadra more concentrates on lighter aspect in the first half and soon drifts into mundane faction drama in the second half. it is laced with clichd faction film formulae, tata sumo chases, killings and counter killings, flashback method, and gory".


== references ==


== external links ==
bhadra at imdb
bhadra film at basthi.com