bhooter bhabishyat (  english: future of the past or future of ghost) is a 2012 indian bengali ghost comedy film directed by anik dutta. the film became one of the biggest hits of 2012 among the bengali films. it is a film with supernatural element. it is the directorial debut of anik dutta. it was well received by various critics for its direction, and storyline.


== plot ==
ayan sengupta, an ad director, visits a palace-like house for shooting his new ad. his dream is to make a movie but he doesn't have enough money. a man named biplab dasgupta, who he encounters in the house, narrates a story to ayan. the story is about an old decrepit house called the chowdury mansion, which was haunted by the spirit of its last owner, before other wandering ghosts settled down. 
the first section of the story, describes the ghosts familiarizing with each other and as their initial hostility towards each other disappears, as they start to regard each other as friends. unfortunately, this atmosphere of peace and tranquility is destroyed when the ghosts discover that a greedy, plot dealer had made up his mind to convert the large, old house into a deluxe shopping mall. it is then upon the ghosts to figure out, how they will go about trying to save the house that granted them shelter, even after their deaths. will they be able to save chowdury mansion from the prying eyes of the selfish dealer?


== cast ==
paran bandopadhyay as darpa narayan chowdhury, the owner of the house, the zamindar ghost
swastika mukherjee as kadalibala dasi, an actress ghost from the 1940s
sumit samaddar as bhootnath bhaduri, a refugee ghost from bangladesh
sabyasachi chakrabarty as biplab dasgupta, the story teller and a naxalite ghost
george baker as sir donald ramsey, an englishman ghost
mir afsar ali as ganesh bhutoria, the builder
udayshankar pal as atmaram paswan, the rickshawpuller ghost from bihar
pradip dasgupta as khaja khan, the cook ghost from siraj-ud-daula's kitchen
samadarshi dutta as pablo patranabis, the rock musician ghost
mumtaz sorcar as koel dhar, the ghost of an industrialist's daughter
parambrata chatterjee as ayan sengupta, an aspiring director
biswajit chakraborty as brigadier yudhajit sarkar, an army officer's ghost who died during the kargil war
arunava dutta as nantu, production manager
ashes bhattacharyya as lawyer of ganesh bhutoria
bibhu bhattacharya as sudhirbabu, caretaker of "chowdhury palace"
saswata chatterjee as haatkata kartik, a criminal ghost
sreelekha mitra as madhumita sanyal
monami ghosh as laxmi, bhutoria's dead wife
kharaj mukherjee as pramod pradhan aka pod podhan (po'od p'odhan)
sanjay biswas as t. k. guchait, bhutoria's secretary
anindita bose as rinka
debdut ghosh as keshab narayan chowdhury, lover of kadalibala


== release ==
bengali film stars were present in the screening of the film in march 2012. the indian express gave bhooter bhabishyat a four-star rating and described the film as "one of the most intelligent and satiric comedies one has seen in a long time". the film was also released in mumbai, bangalore and delhi in april 2012.


== remake ==
the film has been remade in hindi as gang of ghosts, directed by satish kaushik.


== legacy ==
two of the films character has been portrayed in an ad-film of bisk farm top biscuit; where debdut ghosh reprises his role as keshab narayan chowdhury, and actor pushpita mukherjee replaces swastika mukherjee as kadalibala dasi.


== see also ==
ashchorjyo prodeep
chhayamoy
jekhane bhooter bhoy


== references ==


== external links ==
 bhooter bhabishyat at imdb