big b (short form of big brother) is a 2007 india malayalam-language action thriller film co-written and directed by amal neerad, starring mammootty, manoj k. jayan, bala and sumit naval. the cinematography was done by sameer thahir, songs were composed by alphons joseph and background score by gopi sundar. the film is an unofficial remake of the american film four brothers (2005). this movie was dubbed in hindi as big b hai badshah.
'big b has been described as a landmark movie in malayalam cinema for the freshness and style the movie possessed at the time of its release, which apparently gave the movie an iconic stature and cult following..  
a sequel titled bilal (2nd part of big b)was announced by amal neerad on 17 november 2017.


== plot ==
the story begins with the cold-blooded murder of mary john kurishingal (nafisa ali). her adopted sons arrive for her funeral from various places; bilal john kurishingal  a gangster (mammootty), eddy john kurishingal-hotel owner (manoj k jayan), murugan john kurishingal   film stunt master (bala) and bijo  a student (sumit naval). the four brothers take it upon themselves to unearth the mystery behind their mother's murder. bilal starts meeting his old friends and contacts in the kochi underworld to get information on the killers. little by little, they piece together the evidence and find out that the murder was committed by two professional 'hitmen' from mumbai. the acp balaji shakthivel (pasupathy), who is an upright cop put in charge of investigations, tries his level best but cannot fetch any evidence to prove anything related. they soon find out that the murder was one of the many meticulously planned operations, aimed to check the teacher's intrusions into unlawful exporting of children from kochi. as the mayor (ramesh varma) and his henchman, an underworld don called saiyuppu tony (sherveer vakil) are involved, the brothers decide to take up arms to avenge their mother. how they accomplish their revenge forms the rest of the story.


== cast ==
mammootty as bilal john kurishingal
manoj k jayan as eddy john kurishingal
bala as murugan john kurishingal
sumit naval as bijo john kurishingal
nafisa ali as mary john kurishingal
shereveer vakil as 'sayippu' tony
lena as celina, eddy's wife
mamta mohandas as rimi tommy, murugan's love interest
innocent as tommy parekkadan, rimi's father
vijayaraghavan as ci george
maniyanpilla raju as doctor venu
manasa as bijo's lover, daughter of venu
pasupathy as balaji sakthivel, assistant commissioner of police
ramesh varma as mayor
vinayakan as pandi asi, 'sayippu' tony's henchman
santhosh jogi as felix, local goon and villain's henchman
sreejith ravi as anthakaram babu
paris laxmi as dancer in the song "oh january"
jinu joseph as killer 1
og sunil as killer 2
jaffar idukki as dog shamsu
v. k. sreeraman as advocate
master govind nambiar as abu


== release ==
the film was released on 13 april 2007.
although it was praised later for its cinematography and editing, the film was an average grosser at that time. but mammootty gained lot of appraisal for his portrayal as bilal. 
he received the best actor award from asianet film awards for his role in the film. the director announced a sequel to the movie titled as bilal in 2017.


== music ==
the songs were composed by alphons joseph, with lyrics penned by jophy tharakan and santhosh varma. the background score was composed by gopi sundar. shreya ghoshal sang her first song in malayalam through this film.. the song 'o january' is an unofficial cover of shakira's ojos as.

track listing


== references ==


== external links ==
big b at imdb