big stan is a 2007 american prison comedy film starring, produced and directed by rob schneider in his directorial debut. co-starring marcelo ortega, jennifer morrison, scott wilson, henry gibson, richard kind, sally kirkland, jackson rathbone, m. emmet walsh and david carradine. this film was gibson's final role before his death in 2009.
although released in some markets during the fall of 2008, it was released straight to dvd in the u.s. on march 24, 2009. it debuted at number 17 on the dvd rental charts of march 2330, 2009.


== plot ==
stan minton (rob schneider) is a wealthy real estate con artist, married to mindy (jennifer morrison). one day, he is found guilty of conning elderly people out of their savings. his lawyer mal (richard kind) defends him at the trial. upon being found guilty and sentenced to 3 years in prison, he's given 6 months by judge perry (richard riehle) to get his affairs in order. stan's fear of jail-house rape leads him to hire the mysterious guru known as "the master" (david carradine) who helps transform him into a martial-arts expert.
during his incarceration, stan uses his new-found skills to intimidate his fellow prisoners and prevents the prisoners from hitting or raping each other. he gains their respect, and eventually becomes their leader, bringing peace and harmony to the prison yard. but the corrupt warden gasque (scott wilson) has plans to force its closure with a riot, and sell off the property as valuable real estate. stan helps him with the real estate aspects in exchange for early parole, however his peacemaking efforts threaten the warden's plan for a riot and he is persuaded to bring back violence. 
in a last minute attack of conscience, he deliberately blows the parole hearing to rush back and prevent the deaths of his fellow inmates, only to discover that his message of peace has sunk in and the prisoners are dancing instead of fighting. warden gasque orders the guards to open fire on the dancing men. when they refuse, he grabs a gun and shoots wildly. warden gasque attempts to shoot minton, but he is stopped by mindy and the master, who had sneaked in.
three years later minton leaves the prison, which is now run by one of the more sympathetic guards, as gasque is now an inmate after he was arrested for his illegal activities. stan is met by his wife, his young daughter mindy jr., and the master outside the prison.


== cast ==
rob schneider as "big" stan minton
jennifer morrison as mindy minton, stan's wife.
scott wilson as warden gasque
henry gibson as inmate larry or "shorts"
richard kind as mal, stan's lawyer.
sally kirkland as madame foreman, a  jury member
jackson rathbone as robbie the hippie
m. emmet walsh as lew popper
david carradine as the master
marcelo ortega as big haa
marcia wallace as alma
diego corrales as julio
randy couture as carnahan
don frye as nation member
brandon molale as piken
lil rob as inmate
brandon t. jackson as deshawn
olivia munn as maria, a secretary.
barbara dodd as mrs. darby
richard riehle as judge perry
kevin gage as bullard
dan inosanto as prison chef
bob sapp as big raymond
tsuyoshi abe as dang
buddy lewis as cleon
megan cavanagh as parole board member
dan haggerty as the ex-con
faith womack as mindy jr., stan and mindy's daughter.rob schneider's mother pilar cameos as one of the board of governors. wes takahashi, former animator and visual effects supervisor for industrial light & magic, makes a cameo appearance as a bartender.


== reception ==
on rotten tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 11% based on reviews from 9 critics (1 positive, 8 negative), with an average rating of 3.02/10.julie rigg of the australian broadcasting corporation was highly critical of the rape-based humor, and concluded " i wasted two valuable hours of my life on big standon't make the same mistake." writing for the sydney morning herald, paul byrnes asked "if there's been a clumsier, dumber, more casually put together collection of badly timed gags, racial stereotypes and lazy performances this year, i have yet to see it...how could [schneider] be in so many movies over a 20-year career and learn so little about making a movie?" brian orndorf of dvdtalk.com called it "a forgettable, unfunny waste of time". he criticized the "unrelenting" repetition of rape jokes, but believed that schneider acted the character's fear of rape convincingly.however, moviehole rated it 3.5 out of 5 and called it schneider's best film since the hot chick.


== see also ==
let's go to prison (2006) a prison comedy film
get hard (2015) a prison comedy film.


== references ==


== external links ==
big stan at imdb
big stan at rotten tomatoes