bill is a 2015 british family adventure comedy film from the principal performers behind children's tv series horrible histories and yonderland. it was produced by punk cinema, cowboy films and bbc films and was released in the uk on 18 september 2015 by vertigo films. the film is a fictional take on the young william shakespeare's search for fame and fortune, as written by laurence rickard and ben willbond and directed by richard bracewell who co-produced with tony bracewell, alasdair flind and charles steel. it features the six lead performers playing several different roles each including mathew baynton, martha howe-douglas, ben willbond, simon farnaby, jim howick and laurence rickard. bill has received mostly positive reviews from critics and grossed $968,534 worldwide. the film also received nominations for the evening standard british film award for award for comedy and the into film award for family film of the year.


== premise ==
bill is set during shakespeare's "lost years"the crucial period, long a mystery to scholars, covering his rise from obscurity in stratford-upon-avon to fame as a playwright in london. according to the official synopsis, the film will tell the "real story" of what happens when "hopeless lute player bill shakespeare leaves his family and home to follow his dream. its a tale of murderous kings, spies, lost loves, and a plot to blow up queen elizabeth i."  writer rickard further explained that this "very different" version of the future bard has already tried "everything from contemporary dance to playing lute in a band. he's never found his calling."


== cast ==
the six members of the starring troupe have been announced as playing 40 total roles, in the manner of the monty python films. confirmed named roles are listed below:

mathew baynton as william shakespeare
martha howe-douglas as anne hathaway
ben willbond as king philip ii of spain
simon farnaby as juan, earl of croydon
jim howick as gabriel, christopher marlowe
laurence rickard as lope, sir francis walsinghamit was subsequently confirmed at the 2014 cannes film festival that homeland star damian lewis would be joining the cast as sir richard hawkins.
other supporting actors include:


== production ==

bbc films announced bill on 13 may 2013, as a co-production with fellow uk production companies punk cinema and cowboy films. head of bbc films christine langan said that "were thrilled [to be] making the first film starring this team of incredibly talented and popular british comedy writers and performers." in november of the same year screendaily.com reported that the bfi (british film institute) film fund had invested 1 million in the production, with further undisclosed amounts coming from bbc films, lipsync and screen yorkshire, through its yorkshire content fund.principal filming began on 10 february 2014 at locations around yorkshire, including york minster, skipton castle, marske-by-the-sea, bolton castle and selby abbey. other filming locations included stowe school, caroline gardens chapel in peckham, london, and weald and downland open air museum in west sussex. the closing scenes were filmed at shakespeare's globe, a modern recreation of the theatre where many of shakespeare's plays were first performed.former horrible histories co-stars rickard and willbond are credited with the bill screenplay, and are also the top-billed performers along with the four other members of the hh starring cast (baynton, howe-douglas, farnaby and howick). despite this connection, and sharing a similar subject matter, the film has no official affiliation with the earlier tv series. it is the second project (after yonderland) created by the sextet as a means to continue working together as a troupe after horrible histories ceased production in 2012, while maintaining the familiar character-and-costume driven comedy style. making the move to film was "a bit scary," willbond said, "but we cooked up a really nice plot." rickard described the overall tone of the new project as "a hundred different brands of idiocy, really... we staunchly defend the idiocy."in contrast to the conscientious grounding in accuracy that was the trademark of horrible histories, bill is by design a purely imaginary tale. in the initial press release for the film, the co-writers noted that "we're playing with history, just as shakespeare did, for the entertainment of the audience." commenting on the choice of subject, rickard added that in fact "the joy of the "lost years" is we can tell a fun story without trampling on the factsit gives us licence to take william shakespeare on a truly ridiculous caper, yet end with him becoming the man the world knows."the first full-length trailer for the film was released in december 2014, at which point the film's theatrical release date  originally scheduled for late february 2015  was confirmed to have been delayed until 27 march the same year. this was subsequently revised again  with no official explanation  to 21 august.vertigo films announced on 12 august 2015 that it would be releasing bill in the uk after previous distributor koch media had closed its uk film distribution business. vertigo films co-owner rupert preston told screen international that the film is really good fun and plays well with both adults and kids. its clever, bright and great british entertainment. 


== soundtrack ==
the film's score was composed by andrew hewitt. the soundtrack was released on 18 september 2015 by varse sarabande.

track listing1593  a time of war and plague
sir richard hawkins is captured
bill shakespeare and his family
king philip ii of spain  deuce or juice?
the first fanfare
the court music of queen elizabeth i
the specialists and walsingham the spy
bill travels to that london
more court music
king phil sails to england
king phil lands in england
the second fanfare
phil's catholic lair
the earl of croydon
even more court music
anne and bill
bill pursued by walsingham
duelin banjos
phil closes in on christopher marlowe
marlowe's death
marlowe's ghost
a series of funny misunderstandings  bernard hughes and laurence rickard
the specialists and the gunpowder plot
prologue to the play
the play begins
the final sword fight
bill's final speech to anne
mortal coil
william shakespeare


== release ==
bill was released in the uk on 18 september 2015 by vertigo films. it was released on dvd in the uk on 15 february 2016.  it was shown on a one-time basis in the united states on 11 april 2016 through fathom events.


== reception ==
the review aggregator website rotten tomatoes reported an approval rating of 89%, with an average rating of 6.32/10 based on 19 reviews.  elliott noble said 'the gags keep coming in a madcap tale that's bard to the bone.' alys keys said 'those who are unaware of their previous work will find just as much to enjoy in this iconoclastic approach to the bard as the most dedicated fans. no matter what your age or fan-status may be, it is simply a joy to watch.' mark kermode said in the guardian, 'nicely balancing its historically literate gags with broad knockabout slapstick, bill is a crowd-pleasing treat that should tickle audiences young and old alike.'
the film grossed $968,534 worldwide.


== accolades ==


== references ==


== external links ==
bill at imdb
bill at rotten tomatoes
bill at british comedy guide