black moon is a 1934 american pre-code horror film directed by roy william neill and starring jack holt, fay wray, and dorothy burgess. it is based on a short story by clements ripley that first appeared in hearst's international-cosmopolitan.the film centers on a young woman who returns to the tropical island where her parents were murdered during a voodoo ritual with her daughter and nanny, only to become corrupted by the native's dark rituals.
a copy is held at the library of congress.


== plot ==
a young girl, juanita, finds her parents killed in a voodoo ritual on a distant tropical island.  she escapes with her life, but when she reaches adulthood, she feels compelled to return to the island, bringing her daughter and a nanny who takes care of the child. once there, she goes to stay with her uncle who lives on the island.  she soon discovers that the natives, who had been using her for voodoo rituals when she was a child, now treat her as a voodoo goddess.  in this role, she begins leading their rituals.
any attempt to fight juanita's influence or to remove her from her position is met with violent force.  one person is found dead in a lava pit, while another is found hanged.  at one point, juanita is so overcome by the voodoo curse that she offers her daughter up for sacrifice.  juanita's businessman husband, stephen, follows her to the island and attempts to travel into the jungle to rescue her, but finds her taking part in a sacrifice of an innocent woman.  although he shoots the high priest of the tribe, juanita completes the sacrifice herself.
their high priest injured, the natives now plan to murder all of the white people on the island.  stephen takes his daughter and two others into the fortified section of a plantation house. the natives succeed in capturing stephen and his secretary, gail, but they are eventually rescued. in the end, stephen shoots and kills juanita just as she is about to sacrifice her own daughter.


== cast ==
jack holt as stephen lane
fay wray as gail hamilton
dorothy burgess as juanita perez lane
cora sue collins as nancy lane
arnold korff as dr. raymond perez
clarence muse as "lunch" mcclaren
madame sul-te-wan as ruva
lumsden hare as macklin
laurence criner, as high priest kalacora sue collins is the last surviving primary cast member.


== release ==


=== home media ===
black moon was released for the first time on dvd by spe on august 1, 2011.


== reception ==
in their 1934 review of the film, the new york times wrote: "black moon, although it is strictly studio-made, is admirably equipped to throw a double-bar-relled scare into the innocent entertainment-hunter." james jay edwards of filmfracture gave the film a mostly positive review, commending the film's downplaying of "stereotypical conventions" associated with the voodoo horror sub-genre, while also noting the predictability of the film's antagonists. edwards concluded his review by stating, "while not one of her more iconic performances, black moon is still an impressive film about voodoo zombies, sans the zombies." on his website fantastic movie musings and ramblings, dave sindelar commended the film for its "brooding atmosphere", unpredictability, and muse's performance; while also noting the film's unevenness, and wray's character existing "more for the sake of convenience than for anything else".


== references ==


== external links ==
black moon at the american film institute catalog
black moon at allmovie
black moon at imdb
black moon at rotten tomatoes
black moon at the tcm movie database