the black dragon society (kyjitai; ; shinjitai: , kokurykai), or amur river society, was a prominent paramilitary, ultranationalist group in japan.


== history ==

the kokurykai was founded in 1901 by  martial artist uchida ryohei as a successor to his mentor mitsuru tyama's gen'ysha. its name is derived from the translation of the amur river, which is called heilongjiang or "black dragon river" in chinese (?), read as kokury-k in japanese. its public goal was to support efforts to keep the russian empire north of the amur river and out of east asia.
the kokurykai initially made strenuous efforts to distance itself from the criminal elements of its predecessor, the gen'ysha. as a result, its membership included cabinet ministers and high-ranking military officers as well as professional secret agents. however, as time passed, it found the use of criminal activities to be a convenient means to an end for many of its operations.
the society published a journal, and operated an espionage training school, from which it dispatched agents to gather intelligence on russian activities in russia, manchuria, korea and china. ikki kita was sent to china as a special member of the organization. it also pressured japanese politicians to adopt a strong foreign policy. the kokurykai also supported pan-asianism, and lent financial support to revolutionaries such as sun yat-sen and emilio aguinaldo.
during the russo-japanese war, annexation of korea and siberian intervention, the imperial japanese army made use of the kokurykai network for espionage, sabotage and assassination. they organized manchurian guerrillas against the russians from the chinese warlords and bandit chieftains in the region, the most important being marshal chang tso-lin. the black dragons waged a very successful psychological warfare campaign in conjunction with the japanese military, spreading disinformation and propaganda throughout the region. they also acted as interpreters for the japanese army.
the kokurykai assisted the japanese spy, colonel motojiro akashi. akashi, who was not directly a member of the black dragons, ran successful operations in china, manchuria, siberia and established contacts throughout the muslim world. these contacts in central asia were maintained through world war ii. the black dragons also formed close contact and even alliances with buddhist sects throughout asia.
during the 1920s and 1930s, the kokurykai  evolved into more of a mainstream political organization, and publicly attacked liberal and leftist thought. although it never had more than several dozen members at any one time during this period, the close ties of its membership to leading members of the government, military and powerful business leaders gave it a power and influence far greater than most other ultranationalist groups. in 1924, retired naval captain yutaro yano and his associates within the black dragon society invited oomoto leader onisaburo deguchi on a journey to mongolia. onisaburo led a group of oomoto disciples, including aikido founder morihei ueshiba.
initially directed only against russia, in the 1930s, the kokurykai expanded its activities around the world, and stationed agents in such diverse places as ethiopia, turkey, morocco, throughout southeast asia and south america, as well as europe and the united states.
the kokurykai was officially disbanded by order of the american occupation authorities in 1946. according to brian daizen victoria's book, zen war stories, the black dragon society was reconstituted in 1961 as the black dragon club (kokury-kurabu). the club never had more than 150 members with which to carry out the goals of the former black dragon society.


== activities in the united states ==
the organization influenced black nationalists in the united states who aimed to foment racial unrest to achieve their goal. the ethiopian pacific movement and the peace movement of ethiopia (both african-american black nationalist organizations) claimed they were affiliated with the black dragon society.as part of their effort to support such organizations, the black dragon society sent an agent, satokata takahashi, to promote pan-asianism and claim that japan would treat them as racial equals. he would become a patron of elijah muhammed and the nation of islam, as well as the pacific movement of the eastern world. sankichi takahashi may have also been a member.mittie maude lena gordon, who lead the peace movement of ethiopia, claimed to be personally affiliated with the kokurykai.on march 27, 1942, fbi agents arrested members of the black dragon society in the san joaquin valley, california.in the manzanar internment camp, a small group of pro-imperial japanese flew black dragon flags and intimidated other japanese inmates.


== see also ==
fifth column
sakurakai
ktar yoshida
uyoku dantai
kinoaki matsuo
g-men vs. the black dragon (1943)


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
1914 black dragon statement