blood and wine is a 1997 american neo-noir thriller film directed by bob rafelson and starring jack nicholson, stephen dorff, jennifer lopez, judy davis, and michael caine. the screenplay was written by nick villiers and alison cross. rafelson has stated that the film forms the final part of his unofficial trilogy with nicholson, with whom he made five easy pieces and the king of marvin gardens in the 1970s.


== plot ==
alex gates (jack nicholson) is a miami wine merchant who has distanced himself from his alcoholic wife suzanne (judy davis) with his philandering, and from his stepson jason (stephen dorff) with his indifference. heavily in debt, alex hatches a plan to steal a valuable diamond necklace from the house of his clients, the reese family, where his cuban mistress gabriela (jennifer lopez) works. he cases the house during a wine delivery with jason, who unhappily works in alex's business. jason becomes attracted to gabriela, unaware of her relationship with his father.
on the day of the heist, alex and his partner, a british safe-cracker named victor (michael caine), arrive at the house under the pretense that the reeses' wine cellar needs repairs. gabriela was supposed to let them in, but she was fired the day before. fortunately, alex had cultivated a relationship with the security guard and is able to convince him to let them inside. victor sends alex and the guard off on an errand while he works on the safe, but a second guard becomes suspicious, although victor is able to complete the job before being discovered.
the pair decide that alex will pawn the necklace in new york city, and he invites gabriela to go with him. as he is packing, suzanne chances upon his airline tickets and immediately realizes he is having another affair. the two get into a physical alteration and she knocks him out. panicking, she empties out his suitcase, where he has hidden the necklace, and uses it for her own clothes. she and jason flee to the florida keys. upon arriving, they discover the necklace, but suzanne doesn't want to keep it. jason has it appraised and discovers it is worth $1 million. he also visits gabriela back in miami, giving her the phone number of the place where they are staying.
victor and alex visit jason's friend henry (harold perrineau) in an attempt to learn jason's whereabouts. victor, who is dying of tuberculosis and determined to profit from the heist, assaults henry before alex realizes he doesn't know anything. the pair contact various jewelers to be on the lookout for the necklace and get a report from jason's appraiser. arriving in key largo, victor pretends to flirt with suzanne, but jason, who has gotten a description of henry's assailant, realizes who he is. after a fight, jason flees with his mother in their car. victor and alex give chase and cause an accident that kills suzanne. although injured, jason discharges himself from the hospital and returns to miami to kill his stepfather, only to find gabriela in alex's bed. after a brief argument, they reconcile.
alex discovers jason and gabriela the next morning, and accuses her of sleeping with his stepson. victor confronts jason, who tricks him into thinking that he has returned the necklace to alex. victor goes to alex's house and attacks him before collapsing from exhaustion, whereupon alex smothers victor with a pillow. that night, jason shows the necklace to gabriela. the next day, she calls alex and they search jason's boat, but jason, anticipating this, confronts them and he and alex fight. eventually, jason crushes alex between the boat and the dock, severely injuring him, before casting off. gabriela, who had fled with the necklace, returns and leaves it with alex, saying that she doesn't want it, but pilfers one of the diamonds before she leaves. with an ambulance on the way, alex realizes he has no choice but to dispose of the evidence and throws the necklace into the ocean.


== cast ==
jack nicholson as alex gates
stephen dorff as jason
jennifer lopez as gabriela "gabby"
judy davis as suzanne gates
michael caine as victor "vic" spansky
harold perrineau jr. as henry
robyn peterson as dina reese
mike starr as mike
john seitz as mr. frank reese
marc macaulay as guard
dan daily as todd
marta velasco as gabriela's cousin


== production ==
british producer jeremy thomas was attracted to work with rafelson due to what he perceived as the director's european sensibilities. he later remembered:

it was a different experience for me, because growing up as an independent producer it was difficult to interact with a corporate system. but then i got this screenplay which had jack nicholson attached to it and bob rafelson, who i knew quite well, and so i thought, i had never gone near a genre-type of film and so maybe i will try some noir-ish sort of film, set in miami, which is the flavour of hollywood, and see if we can do it. it was certainly an incredible cast, and i sold the film to 20th century fox, and i had a moment of flirtation with a studio movie type of film. i am very fond of the film.
blood and wine was shot in miami, south florida and the florida keys, including some scenes at the caribbean club in key largo. alex's family home is located in the coral gables/pinecrest area. gabriela is shown to live in little havana. the reeses live in millionaire's row in miami beach. their house is next to indian creek and has a view of collins avenue. jason's fishing boat is anchored in the miami river, near downtown miami. before the dance scene between alex and gabriela, we see a view of southeast financial center in downtown miami.


== reception ==
rotten tomatoes, a review aggregator, reports that 61% of 31 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average rating is 6.1/10.  david rooney of variety called it "an amusingly caustic, straight-up serving of film noir staples spiced with star charisma".  film critic roger ebert wrote, "blood & wine is a richly textured crime picture based on the personalities of men who make their living desperately. jack nicholson and michael caine are the stars, as partners in a jewel theft that goes wrong in a number of ways, each way illustrating deep flaws in how they choose to live."  edward guthmann of the san francisco chronicle rated it 2/4 stars and wrote, "blood & wine has elements of classic film noir  but it's film noir with a sledgehammer and none of the genre's suggestiveness or style."caine won best actor at the san sebastian international film festival.


== references ==


== external links ==
blood and wine at the american film institute catalog
blood and wine at imdb
blood and wine at allmovie
blood and wine at the tcm movie database
blood and wine at rotten tomatoes
blood and wine at box office mojo