bloodstone is a 1988 indian-american action-adventure film produced by ashok amritraj and sunanda murali manohar, directed by dwight h. little and written by nico mastorakis. starring brett stimely, rajinikanth, and anna nicholas, the film was shot primarily in south india. the story revolves around a mythical ruby called the "bloodstone". the film was dubbed and released in tamil as vairavel. the film is notable for being tamil cinema superstar rajinikanth's only english-language film.


== plot ==
in 12th century india, a huge ruby was bestowed with the power of good and the curse of evil by the spilt blood of princess lafla. in the 18th century, the british stole it. in today's india, small-time crook paul lorre steals the stone back. while attempting delivery to international fence ludwig van hoeven, he realizes the authorities are onto him and slips the priceless gem into the baggage of the unsuspecting sandy and stephanie mcvey. lorre manages to indicate the taxi driver shyam sabu to van hoeven's thugs. sabu realizes that he is being followed, but he does not see the huge ruby fall into a crevice inside his trunk while dropping sandy and stephanie at their hotel. soon sandy and sabu are both in action; sandy in a brutal fight with two thieves ransacking his room and sabu in a life-or-death car chase and shootout.
stephanie gets kidnapped by van hoeven's thugs. van hoeven contacts sandy and proposes stephanie in exchange for the gem at the waterfalls on the road to bangalore. without the ruby, sandy has no option but the police, but sabu produces the stone, igniting a vicious fight between the two equally matched men, ending in a second agreement. sandy will pay well, but the ruby is his to exchange for stephanie's life. they prepare for a conflict while sabu lets his indian friends know that their help may be needed. at every corner, the bungling ramesh is attempting to keep up with the furious pace, always managing somehow to fail. sandy and sabu are ambushed while exiting the rain forests but survive the shootout and capture two of van hoeven's men, learning of the lone secret passage before tossing misba them over the waterfalls.
van hoeven is giving a festive, lavish party. but sandy and sabu have penetrated the palace with plans of their own, when they... drop unexpectedly. the ruby proves to be a fake and they are moments from execution when sabu's friends storm the fortress and a bloody mle ensues. sandy, stephanie and sabu escape directly into the gun barrels of ramesh's men. they are clean, van hoeven is arrested and inspector ramesh is a hero... but the bloodstone is still missing.


== cast ==
rajinikanth	... 	shyam sabu
brett stimely	... 	sandy mcvey
anna nicholas ... 	stephanie
charlie brill	... 	inspector ramesh
jack kehler	... 	paul lorre
christopher neame	... 	van hoeven
tej sapru  	... 	manu
bob christo	... 	haggerty
deep dhillon	... 	tanjeer
carol teasdale	... 	anna
laura albert	... 	kim chi
marjean holden	... 	shirley
dhanushkodi	... 	maniam


== production ==
the film was mainly shot in bangalore.


== reception ==
to date there have been no reviews collected by review aggregator rotten tomatoes; based on 200 user ratings, the film has a 36% rating on the site.


== references ==


== external links ==
bloodstone at imdb
[1]