bobbili raja is a 1990 indian telugu-language romantic action film produced by d. suresh under the suresh productions banner, directed by b. gopal. it stars venkatesh and divya bharati, with music composed by ilaiyaraaja. it marks the debut of divya bharati. the film was recorded as a sensational blockbuster at the box office.


== plot ==
the film begins with election campaigning in the village bobbili. sundaraiyah and rajeswari devi are strong opponents in elections. rajeswari and her elder brother ahobala rao play a lot of tactics to win the elections, but their younger brother suryam supports sundaraiyah and also loves his daughter rajyalakshmi and she becomes pregnant. everybody dishonors her, and ahobala wants to take an advantage of the situation in the election campaign. when suryam decides to reveal the truth to everyone, ahobala tries to stop him. in that quarrel, suryam accidentally dies. ahobala plays a game and keeps the blame on sundaraiyah and rajyalakshmi. both of them are arrested, but they somehow escape from jail and reach a forest.
after 25 years, raja, rajyalakshmi's son, has always lived in the jungle with his mother and grandfather. rani is rajeswari's daughter and she is the minister of forests who has been brought up amidst wealth. once, rani visits the forest along with her friends for a tour. raja guides them in the forest, both of them having silly fights with each other along the way. one day, both are lost in the deep forest. after several adventures, they fall for each other.
meanwhile, rajeswari reaches the forest in search of rani. during the search, she finds that raja is the sundaraiyah's grandson. she catches sundaraiyah and rajyalakshmi and interrogates them. rajyalakshmi and rajeswari challenge each other; that she will get her son married to rani, but rajeswari says it will never happen. finally, rajeswari finds rani and takes her back. once rani comes to know that raja is her maternal uncle's son (her bava), she escapes from home with her father appa rao's help and goes back to the forest where rajeswari follows her. rajyalakshmi hands rani over to her mother and tells her son will get rani back honorably and he will prove his mother is innocent.
raja enters into bobbili after listening to his mother's past and decides to teach rajeswari a lesson. raja starts the game with rajeswari by making a threat to her ministry, but she double-crosses him by arresting rajyalakshmi in the old murder case. raja tries for bail, but when the policeman misbehaves with him, raja fights with them and is arrested. raja reveals the truth in court and on his words, the government reacts on rajyalakshmi and removes her from the ministry. meanwhile, ahobala also cheats rajeswari and forcefully makes rani's marriage arrangements with his son amurtha rao. the incident opens rajeswari's eyes, and she apologizes to raja and rajyalakshmi. finally, ahobala admits his mistake, and raja and rani get married.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music composed by ilaiyaraaja. lyrics written by sirivennela sitarama sastry. music released on echo music company.


== box office ==
the film had a 175-day run in 3 centres. it is venkatesh's first silver-jubilee hit movie. it was the highest running film in venkatesh's career (210 days), until its record was broken by kalisundham raa (220 days), 10 years later.


== awards ==
filmfare award for best music director  telugu - ilaiyaraaja


== references ==


== external links ==
bobbili raja at imdb