bollywood queen is a british indian take on the william shakespeare play romeo and juliet, directed by jeremy wooding and starring preeya kalidas and james mcavoy. produced by jeremy wooding, the film was released in 2003.


== plot ==
geena (preeya kalidas) is a bollywood fanatic from a respectable gujarati family. she has finished school, and is at university doing a business studies course. she is dating dilip (ronny jhutti), an ambitious computer whizz, but wants her love life to be like it is in the movies. however, dilip only wants sex. geena's family owns ganesh global, a clothing company which imports materials and saris from india. geena has a part-time job working in the shop. she is also in a secret band with two other girls, anjali (kat bhathena) and neeta (karen david).
jay (james mcavoy) is a young guy from somerset who joins his brother dean (ciarn mcmenamin) in london, who also works in the clothing industry, for someone called frank (ian mcshane). he owns a guitar, of which he is extremely protective.
one day, when geena is walking along the road, jay and his brother happen to be managing some poles. one of the poles nearly falls on geena, but jay lunges at her and pushes her out of the way before it can crush her. geena, disgusted at this, hurries along, leaving her phone behind. jay sees the phone and takes it, but his brother dean repossesses it. jay then takes the phone back and gives it to geena, who then thanks him for saving her life. she then gives him her phone number, and they begin to meet up regularly.
the two start to fall in love, meeting up in secret regularly and hiding from geena's family. however, dean comes to know of the affair and launches an attack on ganesh global. one of geena's brothers also sees the two together, and geena gets into trouble with her family. her brother then takes away her phone. geena's brothers then beat jay up, leaving him bleeding. jay and geena then run away together and escape their family. dean is in hospital, and jay visits him and takes away all his money.eventually, jay and geena return to london and jay settles his dispute with his father and brother. geena then turns up for her relative's wedding, dressed in indian attire, and sings with her band. she then attempts to reunite with her family, and it is revealed her brother, sanjay (amerjit deu) is a criminal, and is handling illegal suits, and that her brother, tariq (saraj chaudhry) is gay. jay and geena then leave in the bride and groom's carriage, and her mother says to her father, "she'll be back."


== cast ==
preeya kalidas as geena
james mcavoy as jay
ray panthaki as anil
ciarn mcmenamin as dean
kat bhathena as anjali
ian mcshane as frank
amerjit deu as sanjay
karen david as neeta
lalita ahmed as geena's mother
andy beckwith as johnny
jo cameron brown as anita
saraj chaudhry as tariq
giada dobrzenska as club kid
ronny jhutti as dilip
tajpal rathore as family member
ranu setna as uncle ganesh
faizaan shurai as factory worker
elsa de belilovsky as elsa


== awards and nominations ==
british independent film awards

jeremy wooding- douglas hickox award- nominated


== external links ==
bollywood queen at imdb
bollywood queen at rotten tomatoes