bombay to goa, also known as journey bombay to goa: laughter unlimited,  is a 2007 hindi film.  it stars indian comedians  sunil pal, aasif sheikh, raju srivastava, ahsaan qureshi, and comic actors vijay raaz, asrani and tinnu anand among others. the film was reportedly financed by amit kumar who was arrested for running an illegal kidney sale operation.


== plot ==
the film revolves around two people. lal is an ambitious guy who wants to start his own business and make it big in life. das is a loudmouth, and a very arrogant person. the two manage to get hold of 5100 rupees and they open a vada pav centre. as luck would have it, lal wins rs. 2 lakhs in a contest. the duo plan to start a travel agency. since they do not have enough money to buy a vehicle, they use spare parts of old cars to create a bus. trusting das to come up with a good make of a bus, he blindly hands over the prize money to him. lal manages to get passengers for their first ride. but when the bus comes all hell breaks loose with people demanding their money back. but when the passengers are forced to ride in it, it creates a unique experience for them.
the group finds dying thief and he tells them about a hidden prize with a map. they tear the map and everyone keeps s piece, to work together. however, greed leads to a rat race, but they somehow manage to find gold under a statue which they pulled down, but the gold is seized by the police. after the police are off with the gold, the passengers as well as the bus owner duo begin to repent their greed and decide to do a "philanthropic" job by fixing the fallen statue. but trying to fix the statue they manage to break it into pieces. inside is a pack of diamonds. lal thanks god for the reward and everybody gets their share of the diamonds.


== cast ==
sunil pal as lal singh
raju srivastav as anthony gonsalves
vijay raaz as dasa
ehsaan qureshi as abudul karim telgi
aasif sheikh as dr. kushal bhardwaj
sudhir pandey as charandas
anirudh agarwal as junglee
tinu anand as bibhuti bhushan banopadhya
asrani as post master
birbal
dinesh hingoo as pakya's dad
jagdeep as latif khekada - husna's dad
banwarhlal jhol as dhasrat
bharat kapoor as inspector at dongri police chowki
shakti kapoor as a.c.p shakti singh
mushtaq khan as radha's dad
khayali as pakya
viju khote as patient in wheelchair
sanjay mishra as bengali sardar
nafisa as lajjo v. kutti
paintal
navin prabhakar
deepak raja as aditya chopra
ranjeet as colonel
rakheee as deepa v. kutti
sheela sharma as pakya's mom
deepak shirke as vishwavaram kunmali kutti kutti kutti / vetti kutti anna


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by nitin shankar, and ravi meet, and lyrics were written by shabbir ahmed. the soundtrack was released by eros music.


== references ==


== external links ==
bombay to goa (2007 film), official website
bombay to goa at imdb
bombay to goa - new at eros entertainment.com