boom  is a 2003 indian black comedy thriller film directed by kaizad gustad and produced by jackie shroff's wife, ayesha shroff, the film features amitabh bachchan, jackie shroff, gulshan grover, padma lakshmi, madhu sapre, zeenat aman and katrina kaif. boom was katrina kaif's debut film. she was a last-minute replacement of model meghna reddy.released on 19 september 2003. it explores the involvement of the fashion world with underworld crime.


== plot ==
anu gaekwad (madhu sapre), sheila bardez (padma lakshmi) and rina kaif (katrina kaif) are three of india's top models and they are participating in a fashion show hosted by a prestigious brand of diamond jewelers. while on the ramp of the fashion show, one of the other models (perhaps intentionally) trips anu, and she goes crashing down, which is a model's worst nightmare. anu's supportive friends, sheila and rina, come to the rescue. the trio immediately confront the model who had tripped anu and the argument (held in front of the audience) degenerates into a catfight. as the women scuffle with each other, they are met with a big surprise. hundreds of glittering stolen diamonds, which were due to be smuggled out of the country, fall from the model's hair and on to the ramp, only to be snatched up by paparazzi and celebrities alike.
anu, sheila and rina are in shock as the fashion show turns to mayhem. the stolen diamonds are priceless and have to be recovered by the gangsters, who hold the three glamorous models responsible for the heist-gone-wrong. the diamonds were due to be smuggled to dubai and were stolen by chhote mia (jackie shroff). they were then to be handed to his brothers. the leader of the trio, bade mia (amitabh bachchan) is determined to get the diamonds back and so begins a cat-and-mouse game between the three models and the three gangsters.


== cast ==
amitabh bachchan as bade mia
gulshan grover as medium mia / cutpiece salim suiting shirting
jackie shroff as chhote mia / abdul 50-50
zeenat aman as alice
katrina kaif as rina kaif / popdi chinchpokli
madhu sapre as anu gaekwad
padma lakshmi as sheila bardez
javed jaffrey as boom shankar aka boom boom
seema biswas as bharti
boman irani as jewellery shop owner/potential diamond buyer in dubai
bo derek  cameo appearance
rohit bal  cameo appearance
wendell rodricks  cameo appearance


== box office ==
the film performed very poorly at the box office. its lifetime collections amounted to no less than rs. 12 million
. the producer of the film, ayesha shroff, had to sell some assets for herself and her husband (jackie shroff) ; the money owed to one financier alone amounted to rs. 180 million. shroff later indicated that his marriage suffered as a consequence, and that his relationship with his wife "was tough after boom."


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by sandeep chowta and talvin singh.


== references ==


== external links ==
boom at imdb