bornova bornova is a 2009 turkish drama film, written, produced and directed by inan temelkuran, depicting a day in the lives of three young men from the same neighborhood in izmir's bornova district. the film, which went on nationwide general release across turkey on november 13, 2009 (2009-11-13), won several awards, including the golden orange and turkish film critics association awards for best film, at the 46th antalya "golden orange" international film festival.


== plot ==
one day in the lives of three young men from the same neighborhood in izmir's bornova district. hakan (ner erkan) is a young man who spends his entire day in front of the neighborhood's grocery shop with salih (kadir ermik), thinking, if we were just given the chance salih, the neighborhood's psychopathic rogue, is like an older brother to hakan, who has just returned home after completing his mandatory military service. hakan does not have a job, but he plans to become a taxi driver to be able to realize all he wants in this life: to earn just enough money to be able to decently look after a small family and to marry the girl he secretly adores. salih is the only person who listens to hakan and gives him advice. although salih has grown up in a respectable, educated family, he's involved in every kind of illegal business in the neighborhood. everybody in the neighborhood is scared of him, including high school student zlem (damla snmez). hakan is crazy about zlem, but he never had the courage to talk to her in person. in the meantime, murat (erkan bekta), salih's childhood friend and a doctoral student in philosophy, makes a living through writing erotic fantasies. he tells hakan about an erotic fantasy that he wrote based on an event involving salih and zlem. disappointed and confused, hakan heads toward zlem's house to learn about the whole thing.


== see also ==
2009 in film
turkish films of 2009


== references ==


== external links ==
official website (in turkish)
official website
bornova bornova at imdb
filmpot distributor page for the film
interview with director inan temelkuran