born again is a 1978 american biographical drama film depicting the involvement of charles colson in the watergate scandal, his subsequent conversion to christianity, and his prison term stemming from watergate.  it starred  dean jones as colson, anne francis as his wife, dana andrews as tom phillips, harry spillman as president nixon, former senator harold hughes as himself, and george brent in his final film.  the director was old hollywood classic filmmaker irving rapper, and the film was released by avco embassy pictures. the cinematography was by harry stradling jr.
the film's title theme song "born again", with music by les baxter and lyrics by craig johnson, was sung by larnelle harris.


== plot ==
as president richard nixon's special counsel, colson had his own office in the white house, with power and prestige. after watergate, he had a prison record and a strong faith. colson, played by dean jones, pleads guilty to watergate-related charges and is sent to prison. the experience leaves him radically changed, and he decides to establish prison fellowship  a ministry that now reaches around the world.


== cast ==
dean jones - charles colson
anne francis - patty colson
jay robinson - david shapiro
dana andrews - tom phillips
raymond st. jacques - jimmy newsom
george brent - judge gerhard gesell
harold hughes - himself
billy graham - himself
harry spillman - president richard m. nixon
scott walker - scanlon
robert gray - paul kramer
arthur roberts - al quie
ned wilson - douglas coe
dean brooks - dick howard
christopher conrad - christian 'chris' colson
peter jurasik - henry kissinger
stuart lee - wendell colson
richard caine - h.r. haldeman
brigid o'brien - holly holm
robert broyles - john ehrlichman
anthony canne - burkhardt
corinne michaels - raquel ramirez


== production notes ==
born again was filmed from december 14, 1977, to february 8, 1978, at these locations in washington, d.c.: the capitol building, the white house, the executive office building, the justice department, the washington monument and jefferson memorial, the lincoln memorial, st. john's episcopal church, lafayette square, and the watergate complex.
some on-location exteriors were filmed in california; the los angeles county superior court stood in for judge gesell's washington courtroom, and the chino penitentiary known officially as the california institution for men doubled as the federal prison camp on maxwell air force base in montgomery, alabama, where colson served his sentence. soundstage interiors filmed at the burbank studios in burbank, california included replicas of the offices for h.r. haldeman, john ehrlichman, and colson, to which colson donated several items.at the time, born again had the highest budget for any religious film and was the first to be released by a major distributor.


== release ==
the world premiere of born again was held at the kennedy center in washington, dc, on september 24, 1978; in attendance at the premiere were charles colson, actors dean jones and jay robinson, associate producer paul temple, and former senator harold hughes.
two hundred prints of the film were released over a series of two-week periods in three successive regional waves:

september 29 and october 6, 1978: washington, dc; chicago; dallas; seattle; cincinnati, ohio; portland, oregon; and atlanta, georgia.
november 3 to december 10, 1978: charlotte, north carolina; los angeles; denver; and milwaukee, wisconsin.
christmas and new year's 1978-79: minneapolis, minnesota; des moines, iowa; tampa and st. petersburg, florida; indianapolis, indiana; and new orleans, louisianathe film's producers partnered with a religious public-relations expert to promote the film in the christian community nationwide. the outreach campaign included premieres to benefit colsons charity, prison fellowship.


== reception ==
jones's performance was well received.
from the tv guide review: "in born again colson (played by jones) realizes the error of his ways and is born again. his faith sustains him through his prison term. in this sympathetic script, colson emerges as an innocent who is drawn into the devious machinations of washington without his actually engaging in anything untoward."


== dvd release ==
on january 13, 2009, a 30th-anniversary edition of the film was released on dvd in region 1 by crown movie classics.


== references ==


== external links ==
born again at imdb
born again at the tcm movie database
born again at the american film institute catalog