boss is an 2011 indian kannada-language action film directed by r. raghuraj, who has turned to direction from photo-journalism. darshan and navya nair are the lead pair of the film. v. harikrishna has composed the music for the film. this film also features popular tamil actor prabhu ganesan playing the role of a cbi officer.
the film was successful, but not great at the box office. subsequently, the film was dubbed in hindi as "double boss" 


== plot ==
despite being look-alike twins, ram and raj are complete opposites of each other. while ram is a money-minded, egoistic, selfish but cowardly millionaire, raj is an intelligent, brave and selfless young man. though raj worships his brother, ram considers the former as an outcast and uses him only when required. the story takes a turn when raj is falsely accused of murdering inspector mallayya whom he had earlier beaten and jailed in the prison where there is another enemy of raj in a political gangster. however, raj manages to escape to meet his brother and prove his innocence only to find that the latter has been murdered in his farmhouse. after secretly cremating ram, raj returns to the city in guise of ram to prove his innocence and find his brother's killer. as he begins his investigation he is confronted by cbi officer sethurama iyer aka iyer. iyer who is tasked with finding raj wishes to interrogate ram (in reality raj). he, however, reveals that he suspects some foul play and does not believe that the ram in the office is in fact the real ram. in order to clear his doubts he hires a network of spies to keep an eye on raj and goes to an extent of brutally torturing raj's friends so as to prove that the person who dons the appearance of ram is raj. while trying to convince the officer, he starts to receive mysterious calls from an anonymous employee of ram who claims to know the real identity of raj and threatens to expose it if he continues his drama as ram. what happens later forms the crux of the story.


== cast ==
darshan as ram and raj
navya nair as rani
prabhu as sethurama iyer
rekha vedavyas as sonu
umashri as lakshmi
sumithra as ram and raj's mother
rangayana raghu as nandu
bullet prakash as kumara
killer venkatesh as inspector mallayya
supreeth as chotta bhai


== soundtrack ==
v. harikrishna has composed 5 songs for the film.


== references ==