bright is a 2017 american urban fantasy action film directed by david ayer, written by max landis, and starring will smith, joel edgerton, noomi rapace, lucy fry, dgar ramrez, and ike barinholtz. the film is set in an alternate present in which humans and mythical creatures co-exist and details an lapd police officer and his orc partner confronting racism and police corruption while protecting a magic wand and the elf girl who wields it.
principal photography began in november 2016 in los angeles. the film was released worldwide on netflix on december 22, 2017. while it has received largely negative reviews from critics, it has become one of netflix's most streamed movies ever.


== plot ==
humans coexist with other sentient species, notably orcs and elves. while magic exists, its practice is illegal. rare magical artifacts known as magic wands exist, but only a select few individuals called "brights" can wield them without dying. in los angeles, veteran lapd officer daryl ward has been involuntarily partnered with nick jakoby, the nation's first orc police officer, equally detested by the other officers for his race and his fellow orcs for being a policeman. ward's relationship with jakoby has been strained since ward was shot by an orc that jakoby failed to apprehend; internal affairs suspects jakoby deliberately let the robber go.
one night, ward and jakoby respond to a disturbance at a safe house for the "shield of light", an extremist group that prophesies the return of the "dark lord", an ancient semi-mythical figure defeated many millennia ago. inside, ward and jakoby apprehend the lone survivor, an elf girl named tikka in possession of a wand. ward calls for backup, but the moment the four arriving officers see the wand, they try to coerce ward into killing jakoby and letting them steal the wand for themselves.
ward goes outside and demands the truth about the robber. jakoby explains that he lost sight of ward's assailant and mistakenly apprehended a second, younger orc; jakoby then helped him flee, knowing that the backup officers would probably kill the boy on sight. when the four officers appear behind ward, planning to kill both him and jakoby, ward turns and guns them down. the gunfire attracts the attention of the local hispanic gang, while rumors of the wand draw the attentions of both its owner, leilahthe leader of a radical elf sect called the inferniand kandomere, an elf fbi agent assigned to the federal "magic task force".
the gangsters corner the trio in a strip club, but are slaughtered by leilah, allowing the trio to escape again. at a service station, ward contacts his friend sheriff deputy rodriguez, whom he knows he can trust. rodriguez contacts kandomere, but their conversation is intercepted by leilah, who attacks the service station and kills rodriguez.
escaping again, the trio are captured by the fogteeth orc clan, whose leader dorghu also wants the wand. dorghu orders his son mikey to kill jakoby, but mikey reveals that he was the orc that jakoby saved and refuses to kill him. dorghu sends his son away and kills jakoby himself. as he prepares to kill ward, tikka produces the wand and uses it to resurrect jakoby, revealing that she is a bright. the fogteeth's shaman pronounces this to be part of a prophecy, causing the clan to kneel to jakoby and allow the trio to go free. tikka explains that the inferni believe that assembling three wands will allow them to resurrect the dark lord. she was a member of the inferni but fled the group and was sheltered by the shield of light. leilah loaned her wand to a bright assassin and sent her to kill tikka, but tikka killed the assassin and took the wand.
using the wand to resurrect jakoby has made tikka gravely ill, and the only place she can be healed is a magical pool at the safe house. they return there, but are ambushed by leilah and her two enforcers. in the confrontation, leilah's guards are killed, but leilah holds tikka helpless as ward and jakoby run out of ammunition. ward deliberately grabs the wand, believing that the resulting explosion will kill all of them. to everyone's amazement, ward survives handling the wand, revealing him to be a bright as well. ward kills leilah with the wand, triggering an explosion that sets the building on fire. tikka disappears and the injured ward and jakoby escape the building.
in the hospital, ward and jakoby give kandomere a doctored account of the previous night's events, understanding that the federal agents want any hint of magical activity kept secret.  in a public ceremony, jakoby, ward and rodriguez are honored. ward smiles as he spots tikka moving through the crowd in disguise.


== cast ==
will smith as daryl ward, a human lapd officer.
joel edgerton as nick jakoby, the nation's first orc police officer, who is partnered with daryl.
noomi rapace as leilah, an inferni elf seeking control of the magic wand.
lucy fry as tikka, a young inferni elf who is in possession of the magic wand.
dgar ramrez as kandomere, a high ranking elvish federal agent with the us department of magic's magic task force.
ike barinholtz as pollard, a corrupt human lapd officer who seeks to steal the wand for himself.
happy anderson as hildebrandt ulysses montehugh, a human federal agent who works under kandomere in the magic task force.
dawn olivieri as sherri ward, daryl's human wife and sophia's mother.
matt gerald as hicks, a corrupt human lapd officer.
margaret cho as ching, a corrupt human lapd sergeant.
brad william henke as dorghu, the imposing leader of the fogteeth orcs gang.
jay hernandez as rodriguez, a human lasd deputy.
veronica ngo as tien, an inferni elf enforcer working for leilah.
alex meraz as serafin, an inferni elf enforcer working for leilah.
nadia gray as larika, an inferni elf enforcer working for leilah.
joseph piccuirro as brown, a corrupt human lapd officer.
enrique murciano as poison, the crippled leader of the human altamira gang who uses a wheelchair.
scarlet spencer as sophia ward, daryl and sherri's human daughter.
andrea navedo as perez, a human lapd captain and ward's superior.
kenneth choi as yamahara, a human lapd internal affairs detective.
bobby naderi as arkashian, a human lapd internal affairs detective.
cle shaheed sloan as og mike, the wards' human neighbor.
chris browning as serling, a human questioned by the us department of magic's task force.
joe rogan as himself, who interviews an orc about jakoby.


== production ==

described as "a contemporary cop thriller, but with fantastical elements", the film was directed by david ayer and stars will smith and joel edgerton, with a script penned by max landis, which ayer rewrote. netflix officially picked up the film for a $90 million deal with filming beginning in fall 2016, making it the most expensive netflix film to date. noomi rapace entered talks to join the cast in may 2016. landis stated in an interview that official production was expected to begin in september 2016, but that they had already shot a small part in los angeles. ayer's frequent cinematographer, roman vasyanov, was confirmed to be working on the project. on october 15, 2016, lucy fry was added to the cast. on october 17, 2016, andrea navedo was added to the cast. on october 20, 2016, actor brad william henke was cast in the film. on november 1, 2016, kenneth choi and dawn olivieri were cast in an unnamed role and the role of smith's wife, respectively. on november 9, dgar ramrez was confirmed to be added to the cast. that same month, alex meraz, matt gerald, ike barinholtz and enrique murciano joined the cast of the film in undisclosed roles.


=== filming ===
photos from the set were first published in november 2016. filming was completed by february 4, 2017.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
bright received criticism for its screenplay, cinematography and excessive focus on social commentary. on rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 28% based on 109 reviews, with an average rating of 3.8/10. the website's critical consensus reads, "bright tries to blend fantasy, hard-hitting cop drama, and social commentaryand ends up falling painfully short of the mark on all three fronts." on metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 29 out of 100, based on 26 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".richard roeper of the chicago sun-times gave the film 1.5 out of 4 stars, saying: "bright is basically a tired buddy-cop movie dressed up in bizarre trappings ... it doesnt take itself too seriously, but its not nearly as self-deprecating and funny as it needed to be." writing for rolling stone, david fear gave the film 1 out of 4 stars, criticizing the script and incoherent action scenes, writing: "this combo of gritty cop procedural and fantasy is a dark, dank, dumb-as-hell mess."david ehrlich of indiewire gave the film an "f" and called it the worst film of 2017, saying: "there's boring, there's bad, and then there's bright ... from the director of suicide squad and the writer of victor frankenstein comes a fresh slice of hell that somehow represents new lows for them botha dull and painfully derivative ordeal that often feels like it was made just to put those earlier misfires into perspective." ayer responded enthusiastically to ehrlich's review, claiming that he desired for the film to receive "a strong reaction either way."npr's chris klimek wrote: "critics have already lined up to pillory bright as among the year's worst releases. don't believe the clickbait. lazy but not boring, this net-flick is perfectly, stubbornly mediocre, and less a chore to sit through than either of 2017's vin diesel vehicles."


=== audience response ===
several publications noted that while critics were harsh in their assessment of the film, viewers seemed to enjoy it more and gave positive reactions on social media. netflix announced that the film had been viewed more times in its first week than any of its other releases. according to nielsen ratings, about 11 million american viewers streamed bright within the first three days of its release, with 56% of the audience being male and 7 million being between the ages of 18 to 49. netflix ceo reed hastings noted that: "the critics are pretty disconnected from the mass appeal...[they] are an important part of the artistic process but are pretty disconnected from the commercial prospects of a film. if people are watching this movie and loving it, that's the measurement of success."


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack, titled bright: the album, was released under atlantic records on december 15, 2017, just a week before the official release of the film on december 22, 2017. it features songs performed by various artists including  future, camila cabello,  logic, marshmello, ty dolla $ign, bebe rexha, lil uzi vert, snoop dogg, and x ambassadors.


=== charts ===


== sequel ==
in december 2017, netflix ordered a sequel. the following month, netflix confirmed the sequel was moving ahead, with smith and edgerton reprising their roles and ayer directing and writing the script with evan spiliotopoulos. in august 2018, it was announced the film would begin filming in march 2019 in germany. in september 2019, lucy fry revealed that production had been delayed, citing smith's busy schedule. on may 5, 2020, it was reported that netflix had entered negotiations with louis leterrier, director of the incredible hulk and now you see me, to direct the sequel.


== see also ==
alien nation
cast a deadly spell
onward (film)
shadowrun
special unit 2
ugly americans
witch hunt
wishfart


== references ==


== external links ==
bright on netflix
bright at imdb