brothers of the head is a 2005 mockumentary featuring the story of tom and barry howe (harry and luke treadaway respectively), conjoined twins living in the united kingdom. it was based on the 1977 novel of the same name by science fiction writer brian aldiss.
tony grisoni started working on the screenplay in 1984. he met the directors when they were filming lost in la mancha about the making of the man who killed don quixote.


== plot ==
in the early 1970s, the twins are essentially purchased by sleazy talent manager with plans to turn them into rock stars.  the brothers form a punk rock band called the bang bang. as the band's success grows, a music journalist, laura (tania emery), follows the band writing an article. a romantic relationship develops between laura and tom causing friction between the two brothers.


== cast ==
luke treadaway as barry howe
harry treadaway as tom howe
sean harris as nick sidney
bryan dick as paul day
tania emery as laura ashwood
jonathan pryce as henry couling
howard attfield as zak bedderwick
ken russell as himself
james greene as brian aldiss
luke wagner as young zak


== production trivia ==
brian aldiss, the writer of the original novel, filmed a cameo, however it was cut out and replaced by an actor portraying him. deleted scenes make it clear that in the continuity of the film, aldiss based his novel on a real life case. in the backstory of the action, ken russell (who appears in the film as himself and makes references to his previous rock and roll-based film, tommy), had attempted to make his own uncompleted film version of the "true" story.
ex-crackout members steven eagles, nicholas millard and jack dunkley also have cameos. they also provided the soundtrack to the movie.
all bang-bang music tracks featured in the film were actually performed live by actors harry and luke treadaway themselves, along with the actors portraying the band members. the treadaways, along with all the actors except bryan dick (paul day), recorded studio tracks for the soundtrack album.


== external links ==
brothers of the head on brian aldiss's official site
brothers of the head at imdb
brothers of the head at allmovie