buddha mar gaya is a 2007 bollywood comedy film by  rahul rawail.  it stars anupam kher, rakhi sawant, om puri and paresh rawal. buddha mar gaya was released on 17 august 2007.


== plot ==
laxmikant kabadiya (anupam kher) is one of india's richest industrialists, a self-made man who's risen from selling scrap to become a construction magnate. his conglomerate is on the verge of a 5000 crore ($1 billion) ipo that should make them one of the largest companies in the country. lk's family - his spinster twin sister prerna (mahabanoo mody-kotwal), his two sons ranjeet and sameer (mukesh tiwari), their wives shruti and anju (mona ambegaonkar) respectively and ranjeet's daughters sanjana and namrata, and sameer's son, pawan, can't stop salivating at the thought of all that money.
unfortunately for all of them fate displays a wicked sense of humour. on the night before the ipo opens, lk dies while copulating with a starlet kim (rakhi sawant), who's aspiring to become the heroine of a film that lk plans to produce. the family is distraught and horrified. not because a loved one has died but because now no one will buy their shares. so, on the advice of their family guru - vidyut baba (om puri), the family decides to hide the death of lk for a period of two days till the shares are all sold out. little do they realize the crazy series of events that will follow on account of this duplicity.
after all, hiding the death of a man as famous as lk is a herculean task. to make matters worse, every time they're ready to announce lk's death, fate intervenes forcing them to keep his death hidden for another couple of days. this results in them having to announce the death of a fictitious friend or relative of lk and stage fake funerals. which of course means generating dead bodies and, worse, getting the dead lk to make appearances at these funerals.


== cast ==
anupam kher as  laxmikant 'lk' kabadiya
paresh rawal as ramu
om puri as vidyut 'vidya' baba
rakhi sawant as  kim / vishkanya
mahabanoo mody-kotwal as prerna 'bua' kabadiya
ranvir shorey as munna
mukesh tiwari as sameer l. kabadiya
mona ambegaonkar as anju kabadiya
murli sharma as rohan alexander
mannat kaur as shruti
madhavi singh as namrata
heena biswas as sanjana
jay soni as pawan
jitender bhargava
bobby parvez as ranjeet l. kabadiya
manoj joshi as acp ashwini khandekar
birbal as  havaldar
prem chopra as prem chopra
pratima kazmi as police inspector
vinay pathak
raj tilak as malwankar


== soundtrack ==


== external links ==
buddha mar gaya at imdb