bumm bumm bole (transl.praise be to the lord!) is a 2010 hindi film directed by priyadarshan. the film stars darsheel safary, atul kulkarni, rituparna sengupta and newcomer ziyah vastani. the film is an authorized adaptation of the 1997 iranian film children of heaven which was nominated for the academy award for best foreign language film in the same year. bumm bumm bole was released on 14 may 2010. the title of the film is based on one of the songs of taare zameen par.


== plot ==
khogiram gwala, ritu gwala and their children pinu and rimzim. they don't have enough money for uniform or shoes. things become worse when pinu misplaces jhilmil's only pair of shoes in the vegetable shop. pinu tells jhilmil about the shoes and begs her not to tell their mother; she agrees. she can't go to school without her shoes. they work out a scheme where both of them share the same shoes. rimzim will wear them to school in the morning and hand them off to pinu at midday so he can attend afternoon classes. however, pinu always gets into trouble at school waiting for rimzim to give him the shoes. she takes pinu to their house to shows the place and they find out that family is poorer than them. a day after,  rimzim is attracted to a new shiny pair of shoes that the same poor girl is wearing. she asks her about what she did with her previous pair of shoes and when she learns that the girl had thrown away her old pair of shoes, she is greatly disappointed. temporarily, khogiram, desperate for money, borrows some gardening equipment and heads off with pinu to the rich suburbs of the town to find some gardening work. they try many mansions until a mansion belonging to a 6-year-old girl and her grandmother agreed. while pinu plays with the 6-year-old girl, his father works. meanwhile, pinu comes to know of the interschool marathon where one of the prizes is a pair of shoes. pinu enters the marathon race in the hope of receiving the third prize of a new pair of sneakers (the first prize being free education to the winner till he completes high school), which he could exchange for girl sneakers and give to rimzim. he accidentally wins the race and is placed first. he is shocked and cries on the podium as he watches in despair at the new pair of sneakers being awarded to the third placed runner. the film ends with rimzim finding out that she will not get a new pair of shoes, but there is a quick shot of their father's bicycle at the end of the movie that shows what appears to be red shoes with red trimming for rimzim and another pair of white basketball shoes, presumably for pinu, whose old shoes were torn from so much use.


== cast ==
darsheel safary as pinu (pinakin)
atul kulkarni as khogiram
rituparna sengupta as khogiram's wife
ziyah vastani as rimzim
wahiida as principal


== soundtrack ==


== see also ==
homerun (film), a 2003 singapore adaptation of children of heaven.


== references ==


== external links ==
bumm bumm bole at imdb