c kkompany (alternatively c company) is a 2008 bollywood comedy film directed by debutant sachin yardi, and produced by ekta kapoor and shobha kapoor. the film stars tusshar kapoor, rajpal yadav, raima sen and anupam kher. it released on 29 august 2008 to negative reviews from critics, and was a failure at the box office.


== plot ==
three individuals - akshay (tusshar kapoor), mr. joshi (anupam kher), and lambodar jha (rajpal yadav) have their own share of troubles as a common man. while akshay is a struggling crime reporter, mr. joshi is a retired accountant troubled by his ungrateful son. lambodhar works as a mascot in a mall, but tells his son he has a business. lambodar finds it difficult to deal with his wife over his job and is very aggressive to tall people because he is very short and is often mocked for his height. together they share their plight and find solace in each other's company.
akshay wants to marry the love of his life, priya (raima sen), the sister of the leader of d company, dattu bhai. mr. joshi wants to get 1 crore from his son which he claims he has a right to, since mr. joshi has spent 1 crore raising his son. akshay wants a portion of this money to run away from india with his girlfriend. to get this money, the trio call joshi's son, claiming to be from a large gang called c kkompany and threaten to kill his family if he does not comply. through a series of events, this matter becomes public and the trio try to keep it secret. joshi has a friend whose apartment complex is being taken down by people backed by the d company. joshi and lambhodhar plant a fake bomb in the car of a big d company backed businessman, saying that the next time, they could easily put a real bomb if the businessman does not stop the destruction of the apartment complex.
a show called "sarkar ya c kkompany" is aired on zee tv, with akshay as the anchor. in the show, people call in with their problems and the viewers see if c kkompany helps or the sarkar (government). the trio decide to help many people out of sympathy. however, the leader of d company tries his best to discover the identity of the c kkompany. he finds out that c kkompany will be extorting 1 million from joshi's son, and goes to the meeting point (a carnival) to kill the c kkompany members. he catches the trio, but is impressed and lets them go.
in the end, akshay marries priya, with datto bhai happily watching. mr. joshi gets his son's 1 crore rs., and claims he got a lottery to hide the fact that he was c kkompany and that he extorted the money. lambodar starts his own business, and a person has to be at least 6 feet tall to work there. the three live happily ever after, and the movie ends.
the tale of c kkcompany continues and it is found that now sadashiv pradhan is making the calls on c kkcompany behalf, unknown to lambodhar, joshi and akshay. lambodhar, joshi and akshay explain this to dattubhai when questioned.


== cast ==
tusshar kapoor as akshay akki kumar
anupam kher as ramakant joshi
rajpal yadav as lambodar jha
raima sen as priya
mithun chakraborty as dattubhai
dilip prabhawalkar as sadashiv pradhan
nikhil ratnaparkhi as purshottam joshi
sanjay mishra as yadav
vinay apte as inspector jwale
premchand singh as builder's manager
unknown as aarush jha, lambodhar's sonspecial appearances as themselves;

celina jaitly in song "speaker baje"
ekta kapoor in balaji telefilms
karan johar in karan banaye crorepati
mahesh bhatt
saakshi tanwar as herself
sanjay dutt in song "c kkompany"
krystle d'souza
hiten tejwani
gauri pradhan tejwani
karan patel
vishal singh
dimple jhangiani
ali asgar
jatin shah
rakshanda khan
vikas sethi
disha vakani as asha trivedi
pallavi subhash
shubhangi atre


== production ==
sachin yardi, who previously worked as a screenwriter for films such as kyaa kool hai hum (2005) and traffic signal (2007), got an idea for a story which dealt with ordinary men placed in extraordinary situations. he worked on the script for six months and invested much time on the character sketches. speaking about his directorial debut, yardi felt direction to be a satisfying experience and helped him have control over his script. after filming, he felt that the film was executed in the way he wanted it and was quite confident about the way it shaped up.until this film, raima sen appeared in supporting roles in several films such as chokher bali (2003), parineeta (2005), and honeymoon travels pvt. ltd. (2007). this was the first time in her commercial movie career that she portrayed a lead character's role. quite unlike her real life love for food, sen portrays a role of a dietitian. tusshar kapoor, the sibling brother of producer ekta kapoor, loved to work in the film due to his sister's conviction to the film.


== soundtrack ==
"speaker baje" (dhol mix) - sanjay dutt, sunidhi chauhan, anand raj anand
"jaane kya ho gaya mujhko" - shreya ghoshal, k. k., bappi lahiri
"speaker baje speaker baje" - sanjay dutt, anand raj anand, sunidhi chauhan
"c kkompany" (remix) - sanjay dutt
"c kkompany c kkompany c kkompany" - sanjay dutt
"khoka" (remix) - mika singh, bappi lahiri, reema lahiri
"khokha.... khokha jab haat aayega" - mika singh, reema lahiri


== references ==


== external links ==
cast & crew at indiafm
c kkompany review - never go public!
c kkompany at imdb