calendar is a 2009 malayalam romantic suspense thriller fourlingual movie which contains an ensemble cast of prithviraj sukumaran, navya nair, zarina wahab, mukesh, jagathy sreekumar and maniyanpilla raju. the movie's hindi rights has been bagged by karan johar.


== plot ==
calendar tells the story of the strong bonding between a mother and her daughter. thankam george, aka thankamma (zarina wahab), a college professor was widowed at a young age. but she didn't agree to re-marriage and lived for her daughter kochurani (navya nair), now a college student. both thankam and kochurani can't remain separated.
kochurani is in love with olikkara sojappan (prithviraj sukumaran), who is a constant visitor to their house. but things turn sour when thankam learns that sojappan and kochurani are in love. she objects to their marriage. she can't even think of living alone, without her daughter. but ultimately relents on the condition that sojappan won't take kochurani away from her and will stay with her. they are engaged to be married. cut to three years later, thankam and kochurani shift over to another place. and then comes in dr. roy chacko (mukesh).
roy's mother annamma (mallika sukumaran) wants roy to get married as soon as possible. she has been asking manjooran (jagathy sreekumar), in whose hospital roy works (and who is also related to thankam), to find him a suitable bride. it's at this juncture that thankam and kochurani come there. manjooran decides to try to get roy married to kochurani. the story goes on from there and reaches a climax. but fate has something else in store for them.in an accident sojappan(prithviraj) dies and kochurani(navya nair) gets injured.in that accident the doctor who treated kochurani says that to majooran that kochurani was 3 months pregnant.thankamma(zarina wahab) decides to marry kochurani to roy chako(mukesh).after kochurani marry roy things get changed.kochurani now not minding her mother,thankamma gets depressed.thankamma wants kochurani near her so she decides to write a letter for mukesh saying kochurani was in love with a guy named sojappan.an angry kochurani speaks harshly to thankamma which causes thankamma to leave her house.roy convinces kochurani that her mother loves her more thats why thankamma is very possesive of her.now kochurani understands her mistakes and both goes to thankamma's house.when they went to thankamma's house they are shocked to know that thankamma left her house sadly.finally they finds thankamma in her uncle's house.there kochurani goes to her mother to ask pardon for whatever she said in angryness.at last kochurani finds her mother dead. and she regrets badly.


== cast ==
zarina wahab as prof. thankam george
navya nair as kochurani sebastian
prithviraj sukumaran as olikkara sojappan
mukesh as dr. roy philip/ingachan
jagathi sreekumar as k. k. manjooran
mallika sukumaran as annamma
kottayam nazeer as varghese
sudheer karamana as pulikkapparambil variyachan
maniyan pilla raju as fa. thazhekkadan
sidhartha siva as shasikuttan
ashokan as punyalan
pratap k. pothen as cleetus
jeny susan joseph as geethu
archana menon as a nun
renjusha menon as clara
bindu ramakrishnan as sojappan's mother
sangeetha shivan as dr. jessy varghese
ambika mohan as pulikkapparambil variyachan's wife
joy john antony as joyaudience reception
though the movie received  negative reviews from both the audience and critics, the character sojappan obtained cult status after years of the movie release. the character is still being celebrated by the youth and family audiences alike. 
the film's soundtrack contains eight songs, all composed by afzal yusuf and lyrics by anil panachooran.


== soundtrack ==


== external links ==
calendar at imdb