california is a 1947 american western film directed by john farrow and featuring ray milland, barbara stanwyck, and barry fitzgerald. barbara stanwyck's singing voice was dubbed by kay st.germaine.


== plot ==
a deserter who had been an army lieutenant, jonathan trumbo is hired to guide a wagon train bound for california during the california gold rush.  when a woman named lily bishop is accused of cheating at poker in a saloon, farmer michael fabian invites her to join the wagon train over trumbo's strenuous objections. trumbo, too, accuses of her of cheating at cards after losing to lily, an insult she promises not to forget.
lily leaves with booth pennock, a ruffian who injures trumbo with a whip before departing. lily ends up in pharaoh city, running a saloon. the town is controlled by pharaoh coffin, a former slave trader who opposes the law and order of california approving statehood. trumbo turns up and gets involved in a saloon brawl. lily orders him never to set foot there again, but trumbo wins the place in a poker game.
she mistakenly takes pharaoh to be an honest man and moves onto his hacienda. coffin's men beat up trumbo, who is rescued on the trail by mexicans and vows revenge. when his wounds heal, trumbo returns and becomes a spokesman for statehood advocacy. coffin's hired men kill fabian for similar beliefs, causing lily to finally see coffin for the crazed villain he is. trumbo forms a posse and corners coffin, who is descending into madness. lily shoots him. trumbo, in love with lily, promises to return to the army to atone for his desertion, hoping someday to return to her.


== cast ==
barbara stanwyck as lily bishop
ray milland as jonathan trumbo
barry fitzgerald as michael fabian
george coulouris as pharaoh coffin
albert dekker as pike
anthony quinn as hernandez
frank faylen as whitey
gavin muir as booth pennock
james burke as pokey
eduardo ciannelli as padre
roman bohnen as col. stuart
argentina brunetti as elvira
howard freeman as senator creel
julia faye as wagon woman
ethan laidlaw as reb (uncredited)
ian wolfe as james k. polk (uncredited)
lester dorr as mike, the dealer (uncredited)


== references ==


== external links ==
california at the american film institute catalog
california at imdb
california at allmovie
california at the tcm movie database
california film trailer on youtube