call girl is a 1974 bollywood romantic drama film directed by vijay kapoor.


== plot ==
amar returns from abroad and is asked by his multi-millionaire father, sonachand, to assist with their family business; amar agrees to do so, on the condition that he could spend the rest of the evening and night doing what he likes - painting.
he meets with a beautiful young woman by the name of kamini, who at first does not disclose her name to him because she is a call girl.
however, amar names her maya and falls in love with her. when he attempts to introduce her to his parents, on reaching his house his mother accepts her, but there she sees his father's (sonachand's) photo and she recalls that he is the same person who had forced her into prostitution by promising her a job.
he'd had an intimate relationship with her years ago and threatened her to get into this business, or else he would kidnap her sister who studies in a boarding school in panchgani and throw her into this business.
but now, kamini/maya has decided to leave this profession. but sonachand does not want amar to marry a call girl. so he tells kamini to act like a call girl once again so that amar leaves her. kamini agrees to do so, because she doesn't want amar to face problems from society as well as his family.
but on the same night, sonachand sees that his own daughter usha has taken to prostitution. meanwhile, amar learns the truth about his father and shuns him.
his father shoots himself because of his guilt and amar leaves his house to go to find kamini, and sees that she has consumed poison and is about to die. so kamini dies and amar is left alone.


== cast ==
vikram ...amar
zaheera ...maya / kamini
iftekhar ...sonachand
helen ...sylvia
jalal agha
paintal ...ramesh
urmila bhatt ...mrs. sonachand
keshto mukherjee
jankidas ...tikamchand
shefali ...ushamusic director: sapan-jagmohan
lyricist: naqsh lyallpuri...
g9..


== music ==
"ulfat men zamaane ki" - kishore kumar, lata mangeshkar
"ulfut me zamane ki (female)" - lata mangeshkar
"hum hai jaha wo pyar ki mahki" - kishore kumar, asha bhosle
"jawaani mera yaara na aayegi dobara" - ranu mukherjee, kishore kumar
"dil jale to koi kya kare" - asha bhosle
"i am call girl" - ranu mukherjee


== external links ==
call girl at imdb