captain january is a 1936 american musical comedy-drama film directed by david butler. the screenplay by sam hellman, gladys lehman, and harry tugend is based on the 1890 children's book of the same name by laura e. richards. the film stars shirley temple, guy kibbee, and sara haden.
there was a tentative renewal, but the film is in the public domain due to "a legal loophole".


== cast ==
shirley temple  as helen 'star' mason, an 8-year-old girl who is a foundling rescued from the sea by capt. january
guy kibbee as captain january, the lighthouse keeper at cape tempest, maine
slim summerville as captain nazro, january's friend
buddy ebsen as paul roberts, january's friend
sara haden as agatha morgan, a stern truant officer
june lang as mary, a 18-year-old woman who is a kindhearted schoolteacher
jane darwell as mrs. eliza croft, a widow smitten with capt. january
jerry tucker as cyril morgan a 10-year-old boy
george irving as john mason, uncle
nella walker as mrs. mason, aunt


== production ==
the movie was the first to use the new sound stage 20th century fox dedicated to will rogers in 1935. temple learned her multiplication tables while doing the tap dance sequence down the spiral staircase. there were two notable animal rights abuses on the set during the making of this movie. in the famous codfish ball sequence, real lobsters were used on the set as a prop but were deemed potentially hazardous and were cooked and repainted their natural red color. in another scene, a live crane was brought in. the bird kept pecking at temple's eyes, however and as a way of solving this problem, nails were driven through the webbing of the crane's feet, anchoring it to the ground.in a scene with buddy ebsen near the water, shirley was originally bare chested. however, complaints from a woman's organization led to the scene being remade with shirley wearing a top.


== see also ==
shirley temple filmography


== references ==
footnotes
works cited


== external links ==
captain january at imdb
captain january at the tcm movie database
captain january at allmovie
captain january at the american film institute catalog
captain january, color
captain january, black & white
a film clip captain january (1936 film) is available at the internet archive