carmen is a 1915 american silent drama film directed by cecil b. demille. the film is based on the novella carmen by prosper mrime. the existing versions of this film appear to be from the re-edited 1918 re-release.


== plot ==
don jos, an officer of the law, is seduced by the gypsy girl carmen, in order to facilitate her clan's smuggling endeavors. don jos becomes obsessed, turning to violent crime himself in order to keep her attention.


== cast ==
geraldine farrar as carmen
wallace reid as don jos
pedro de cordoba as escamillo
horace b. carpenter as pastia
william elmer as morales
jeanie macpherson as gypsy girl
anita king as gypsy girl
milton brown as garcia
tex driscoll
raymond hatton as spectator at bullfight (uncredited)


== production ==
demille had intended to film a musical version of georges bizet's opera carmen, but its libretto was under copyright so demille instructed his screenwriter brother william to base his scenario on the public domain novella carmen by prosper mrime. the novella's carmen was more wilful and manipulative than the opera version. for instance, william included a cigarette factory fight scene from the book which was not found in the opera.composer hugo riesenfeld arranged the orchestral score, his first of many for film, which was based on that of bizet's opera. it was performed at the premiere and other prestigious screenings. there have been two restorations of riesenfeld's score: the first was by gillian anderson, recorded with the london philharmonic orchestra in 1996. timothy brock recorded the second in 1997 with the olympia chamber orchestra. both recordings have accompanied various releases of the restored film on home video.


== reception ==
carmen was praised as a "triumph of superb acting and magnificent scenery" in motion picture magazine. "no small share of this artistic success is due to mr. wallace reid's sympathetic interpretation of don jos," they added. "the 'carmen' film will, in its own way, stand alongside 'the birth of a nation' as an epochmaker," photoplay said in their review. one of their few complaints was on the film's faithfulness to carmen's character of the mrime story.the new-york tribune described it as "the most interesting example of the new art of the photoplay. miss farrar's personality is admirably suited to the screen, and her facial expression was excellent." "geraldine farrar's 'carmen' makes as dramatic an appeal to the eye as her voice ever did to the ear," said the san francisco call & post, "the resolution of geraldine farrar, the beautiful and gifted star, to employ her talents in the attaining of success in the films is one of the greatest steps in advancing the dignity of the motion pictures. miss farrar's 'carmen' in the films is the greatest triumph the motion picture has yet achieved over the speaking stage."geraldine farrar came in fourth place in the 1916 "screen masterpiece" contest held by motion picture magazine for her performance as carmen, with 17,900 votes. she was the highest ranking actress and was behind francis x. bushman in graustark, henry b. walthall in the birth of a nation, and the number one winner, earle williams, in the christian. theda bara's performance of the same role received 9,150 votes.the film is recognized by american film institute in these lists:

2002: afi's 100 years...100 passions  nominated


== see also ==
carmen, (1915) a lost film adaption directed by raoul walsh
a burlesque on carmen (1915) parody by charlie chaplin
the house that shadows built (1931) promotional film released by paramount


== references ==


== external links ==
carmen at imdb
carmen at allmovie
carmen is available for free download at the internet archive
review from motion picture news, printed alongside a review for the walsh production