casanova is a 2005 american romance film directed by lasse hallstrm starring heath ledger and loosely based on the life of giacomo casanova.


== plot ==
a young woman (helen mccrory) tearfully leaves her son (eugene simon) to live with his grandmother and promises to return for him someday. several years later, in 1753, in venice, casanova (heath ledger), is notorious for his promiscuity with women, his adventures being represented in puppet theatres around the city. the doge (tim mcinnerny), the ruler of the city, is a friend to casanova, but cannot be too lenient on him as he wishes to avoid trouble with the church. he warns casanova to marry soon, or he will be exiled from the city. casanova gets engaged to victoria, famous for her virginity, to save himself from exile.
casanova later meets and falls in love with francesca bruni (sienna miller), who writes illegal feminist books under the pseudonym of a man, bernardo guardi, and also argues for women's rights as dr. giordano de padua. francesca mistakes casanova's name for lupo salvato (casanova's servant) and casanova humors her, since she hates the ill-reputed casanova. francesca and her mother are heavily in debt, however, so her mother (lena olin) pressures her to marry rich paprizzio (oliver platt), from genoa, a union arranged by her late father. when paprizzio arrives in venice, casanova lies to him and says that the hotel he booked is closed and he persuades him to stay at his house. casanova also lies and says that he is indeed bernardo guardi. while paprizzio asks his advice on how to impress francesca, casanova lures him to stay at home while receiving treatment for weight loss. casanova visits francesca, pretending to be paprizzio and tells her that he lied to her before to make sure she is not in love with someone else and marrying him only for his money. francesca initially distrusts him but starts gradually to trust him.

during the venetian carnival, francesca recognizes the real paprizzio from his publicity posters which force casanova to confess his true identity making her angry. casanova is arrested by the venetian inquisition for crimes against sexual morality, such as debauchery, heresy, and fornication with a novice. he saves francesca by pretending to be bernardo guardi, which cools her anger. at his trial, francesca confesses that she is the real bernardo guardi, and both are sentenced to death. meanwhile, francesca's mother and the real paprizzio fall in love.
just as casanova and francesca are about to be hanged in the piazza san marco, they are saved by an announcement that the pope gave amnesty to all prisoners who were to be executed on that day, as it was the pope's birthday. it is later discovered that the "cardinal" who gave the announcement was actually an impostor who happens to be casanova's stepfather, wedded to his long-lost mother who came back for him just as she promised when casanova was a child.
as they all escape on paprizzio's boat, francesca's brother, giovanni (charlie cox), stays behind to marry victoria and to continue casanova's legendary womanizing. the real casanova spends the rest of his life as a stage actor touring with his family and the paprizzios.


== cast ==


== production ==
filming began on july 9, 2004, and the finished film was released in the united states on september 3, 2005. visual effects for the film were produced by custom film effects and illusion arts. period costumes were supplied by four different italian costume houses: tirelli costumi, nicolao atelier, costumi d'arte, and g.p. 11, and shoes were manufactured by l.c.p. di pompei. wardrobe was also rented from sastreria cornejo of spain.
despite being set in venice, some scenes were filmed in vicenza, particularly the teatro olimpico, the renaissance theater known for its intricate forced perspective stage design.


== music ==
assagio no. 1 in g minor (andante), composed by johan helmich roman
concerto  5, op. 9 no. 10 in f major for violin, strings & continuo (2. adagio), composed by tomaso albinoni
concerto  5, op. 9 no. 4 in a major for violin, strings & continuo (2. adagio), composed by tomaso albinoni
concerto  5, op. 9 no. 2 in d minor for oboe, strings & continuo (1. allegro e non presto), composed by tomaso albinoni
concerto  5, op. 9 no. 6 in g major for 2 oboes, strings & continuo (3. allegro), composed by tomaso albinoni
tambourins i/ii from the tragdie lyrique dardanus, composed by jean-philippe rameau
overture from the tragdie lyrique zoroastre, composed by jean-philippe rameau
air grave from the tragdie lyrique zoroastre, composed by jean-philippe rameau
menuetts 1 & 2 from the tragdie lyrique zoroastre, composed by jean-philippe rameau
air gai from the opra-ballet le temple de la gloire, composed by jean-philippe rameau
overture from the opra-ballet le temple de la gloire, composed by jean-philippe rameau
overture from the opra-ballet les ftes de polymnie, composed by jean-philippe rameau
overture from the comdie-ballet plate, composed by jean-philippe rameau
gavotte from the opra-ballet les indes galantes, composed by jean-philippe rameau
rigaudons en rondeau from the opra-ballet les indes galantes, composed by jean-philippe rameau
overture from the pastorale acante et cphise, composed by jean-philippe rameau
ballet figure (1st gavotte) from the pastorale nas, composed by jean-philippe rameau
overture from the pastorale nas, composed by jean-philippe rameau
overture from the pastorale zas, composed by jean-philippe rameau
cello concerto no. 3 in d minor (2. amoroso), composed by leonardo leo
concerto in c major for mandolin, strings & continuo (1. allegro), composed by antonio vivaldi
concerto in d major for lute, 2 violins & continuo (3. allegro), composed by antonio vivaldi
sinfonia from the opera farnace, composed by antonio vivaldi
violin concerto il cimento dell'armonia e dell'invenzione, op. 8, no. 11 in d major (2. largo), composed by antonio vivaldi
concerto for 2 violins, cello & strings l'estro armonico, op. 3, no. 2 in g minor (1. adagio e spiccato), composed by antonio vivaldi
harpsichord concerto in b flat major (2. grave), composed by francesco durante
harpsichord concerto in b flat major (1. allegro non troppo), composed by francesco durante
concerto for 2 violins, viola & continuo no. 8 in a major la pazzia (1. allegro), composed by francesco durante
concerto in c major for harpsichord & strings (2. larghetto, 3. rondo), composed by giovanni paisiello
overture from la madrilena, composed by vicente martn y soler
casanova's lament, traditional music, original lyrics by bjrn ulvaeus, performed by tommy krberg
sonata for violin & continuo, op. 5 no. 11 in e major (5. gavotta - allegro), composed by arcangelo corelli
sonata for violin & continuo, op. 5 no. 7 in d minor (3. sarabanda - largo), composed by arcangelo corelli
boure from plaisirs champtres, composed by jean-fry rebel
tastar de corde, recercar dietro, composed by joan ambrosio dalza and performed by christopher wilson and shirley rumsey
rigaudon from water music, suite no. 3 in g major, composed by georg friedrich hndel
boure from music for the royal fireworks, composed by georg friedrich hndel
loure from tafelmusik 1, composed by georg philipp telemann
bella gioiosa, composed by fabritio caroso


== reception ==
rotten tomatoes gives the film a score of 44% based on reviews from 131 critics. the site's consensus states: "this frothy, oddly bloodless film does a disservice to the colorful life of the real casanova."


== references ==


== external links ==
casanova at imdb
casanova at box office mojo
casanova at rotten tomatoes