chaarulatha (also spelled as charulatha) is a 2012 indian horror film made in kannada and tamil. the film was directed by pon kumaran, a former associate to k. bhagyaraj and k. s. ravikumar, and features priyamani in the lead role. the film was an adaptation of the thai horror film alone which itself was based on my brothers keeper an episode of tale from the crypt season 2. sundar c babu composed the film's music. the films story is about conjoined twins. produced by global one studios and distributed by hansraj saxena's sax pictures, charulatha released on 21 september 2012 with dubbed malayalam and telugu versions with the same title.


== plot ==
the story takes it off showing the conjoined twins charu and latha (both played by priyamani). charu and latha lived in vizag as one body and soul until ravi (skanda ashok) comes into their lives. both sisters fall in love with him, however, ravi falls in love with charu, causing a rift between her and latha. finally, their mother (saranya ponvannan) plans to separate their attached bodies through surgery. the surgery, however, results in lathas accidental death. mysterious events begin to unfold as latha begins to haunt charu. several twists take place in line as the story unfolds. she also sees the dead twin playing the violin they used to play in the past and the twin starts to come forward to reach her and disappears as ravi touches charu. later, in the hospital, ravi visits the twins' mother (saranya) where she tries to tell ravi something but is unable to do so. as the problems began to go down, ravi again visits the twins' mother and she tells him something at the graveyard. ravi goes to the cemetery, only to find that the real person who died was charu and that latha has been impersonating charu. flashbacks reveal that after falling in love with charu, ravi comes to visit charu finally as he was leaving town which makes latha angry. latha refuses to follow charu to the balcony to see ravi for the last time. ravi leaves after giving a paper to the guard containing a picture of charu, delighting charu but leaves latha outraged. latha tears the picture angrily and this creates problem between the twins. latha fights with charu on the stairs and both of them fall from the stairs. in this, charu dies and latha calls her mother to help. after this, both of them are separated. after fighting with ravi, latha ties him up to a chair and tells him the truth that she also loved him. charus spirit burns the house in anger and latha stays inside, refusing to leave unless ravi tells that he too loves her. latha's mother scolds and begs ravi to save her only daughter. ravi sacrifices his love to save latha, and reciprocates the latters feelings. the film ends with ravi and latha keeping flowers for charu at her grave, as ravi watched charus soul smiling at him as latha walks towards him, implying that she has blessed their union.


== cast ==
priyamani as charu and latha (dual role)
skanda ashok as ravi
saranya ponvannan as charu and latha's mother
seetha as ravi's aunt
sai sasi
aarthi
r. n. sudarshan
baby gagana as child charu
baby gandhana as child latha
p. ravi shankar as samiyar


== production ==
priyamani was recruited to enact dual roles as conjoined twins in a film loosely based on the thai horror film alone. malayalam actor skanda ashok was signed to play the male protagonist. actors such as saranya ponvannan, seetha and vettaikaran sai sasi were signed on for crucial roles. yoganand, shabari and kalidas penned the dialogues. the budget of the film was reported to be 60 million (us$840,000). priyamani denied that the film was based on the hollywood film stuck on you, asserting that it had an "original storyline".the film went on the floor on ugadi festival day at kanteerava studio bangalore.


== soundtrack ==
the audio and trailer release function of charulatha was held at sathyam cinemas, chennai. hansraj saxena, dhananjayan govind, priyamani, saranya ponvannan, composer vijay antony, lyricist madhan karky alongside directors k. bhagyaraj, k. s. ravikumar and r. kannan graced the event. ravikumar released the audio and bhagyaraj received it.


== release ==
the film was released in kannada and tamil version. the film was also dubbed in malayalam and telugu languages. while the malayalam version was dubbed from kannada, the telugu version was dubbed from the tamil print. the tamil version received a "u" (universal) certificate. later it was dubbed in hindi with same title.
the film was released on 21 september 2012. the satellite rights of the tamil version of film were sold to sun tv.


=== reception ===
charulatha received mixed to positive reviews. in.com wrote that it "works in parts" and added that it was a "good movie in a horror genre". the new indian express' reviewer a sharadhaa days that director pon kumar "does show signs of his hold on film making", further adding that it did not "seem to keep up to the hype", although priyamani was lauded for her "splendid" and "stellar" performance. srikanth srinivasa from rediff labelled it as "priya mani's show all the way" and that it was is a "brilliant film that could have been more emotionally appealing". sify's critic noted that the film "turns out to be a watered down indian remake which is neither spooky nor entertaining", going on to add: "the saving grace of the film is priyamanis twin role as otherwise the script and presentation is shoddy". behindwoods rated the film 2.5 out of 5 stars, saying "for a horror film, there is not much of spookiness or eeriness but for the oft-repeated 'spiritual sojourns. nevertheless charulatha gets its brownie points for the novelty factor, good performance and fitting visual effects coupled with a fairly engaging narration."


== box office ==
the film below average mark at the box office ranging 20% - 35% occupancy on first day collected only  16.6 million (both versions).the film under performed during its first weekend grossed  40 million (both versions) despite having huge number of theaters.


== accolades ==


== see also ==
geethaanjali, a 2013 malayalam-language film with a similar story-line


== references ==


== external links ==
chaarulatha at imdb