chacha bhatija is a 1977 indian bollywood comedy drama film, written by salimjaved and directed by manmohan desai. it was the year's fourth hit for manmohan desai (amar akbar anthony, dharam veer and parvarish are the other three). it was his second film with dharmendra (after dharam veer). chacha bhatija stars dharmendra, randhir kapoor, rehman, hema malini, yogeeta bali, jeevan, master satyajeet and sonia sahni.


== plot ==
teja (rehman) lives with his family, wife-sita, brother-shanker (dharmendra). the family lives happily. things take a turn for the worse, after the death of sita. teja wants to remarry, and he does so. now his new wife is sonia (sonia sahni), who comes to live with him at his palatial home with her brother, laxmidas (jeevan). they have a devious agenda of taking over teja's property. soon after marriage, misunderstandings arise, and shanker is asked to leave the house. these misunderstandings involve sunder, who also are asked to leave the house by teja. he thinks that his brother and son are conspiring against his newly-wedded wife soniya. after some years, sunder has grown up to be a conman, and shanker became a black-marketeer. both chacha shankar and bhatija sunder meet without knowing each other's identity, and a confrontation takes place. when they realize they are relatives, they decide to expose sonia, and open teja's eyes, who is completely blinded by sonia's love and will not let anyone come between them.


== songs ==
"jeena zaroori hai jeene ke liye peena zaroori hai"  asha bhosle
"kehte hain peenewaale yeh gham ka jaawaab hai"  mohammed rafi, shailendra singh, asha bhosle
"jeena zaroori hai jeene ke liye peena zaroori hai"  kishore kumar
"kehte hain peenewaale yeh gham ka jaawaab hai"  lata mangeshkar
"kyun bhai chacha haan bhatija"  mohammed rafi, shailendra singh
"maa ne kaha tha o beta"  shailendra singh
"tera sheeshe ka samaan"  mohammed rafi, lata mangeshkar
"bhoot raja bahar aaja" - asha bhosle


== references ==


== external links ==
chacha bhatija at imdb