chain of desire is an american 1992 drama - romance film directed by temstocles lpez. the film was presented at the turin film festival in november 1992 and was released in the usa on june 25, 1993.


== plot ==
a series of unrelated amorous lovers are connected by a chain of desire. it begins when a woman named alma flees from a would-be lover. she runs into a church, where she meets a man named jesus and they eventually make love.
jesus goes home to wife isa and they make love. isa leaves for an appointment with dr. buckley, with whom she is having an affair. buckley then visits linda, a dominatrix. linda goes home to husband hubert, a television commentator. hubert has sex without her knowledge with a male teen, keith.
keith is introduced to exotic dancer diana, who then has a fling with a much older artist, mel. he goes home to an angry wife, cleo. and that night, all of these people end up at a nightclub where alma is performing. alma has just learned that the lover she fled has been diagnosed with aids.


== cast ==
holly marie combs - diana
mickey cottrell - procurer
malcolm mcdowell - hubert bailey
linda fiorentino -  alma d'angeli
elias koteas - jesus
angel aviles - isa
patrick bauchau - jerald buckley
grace zabriskie - linda bailey
jamie harrold - keith
tim guinee - ken
dewey weber - david bango
seymour cassel - mel
assumpta serna - cleo
kevin conroy - joe
suzzanne douglas - angie
joseph mckenna - m.c
karole armitage - dancer
michael puler - dancer
rachel tucker - dancer
alicia ho - dancer
edward jenkins - dancer
iraida polanco - woman in church
joshua robert kaplan - boy in church
antonia rey - jesus' mother
teodorina bello - santera
brooks rogers - sergeant langdom
lynn frazen-cohen - gloria insburg
rica martens - woman in pearls
ebony jo-ann - laughing woman
mickey cottrell - procurer
sabrina lloyd - melissa
york bergin - tommy
todd bailey - boy in window
sarah newhouse - girl at ticket counter
edgar oviedo sandoval - radio announcer
john schnall - radio announcer
matthew shields - boy at club (uncredited)


== soundtrack ==
the film score was composed by nathan birnbaum with additional music by peter gordon.
the chet baker song "so hard to know", written by roxanne seeman and rique pantoja, appears in the film.


== nominations ==
nancy schreiber: 1993 independent spirit award - best cinematography (nominated)


== references ==


== external links ==
chain of desire at imdb 
chain of desire at rotten tomatoes
"chain of desire (1993)". yahoo movies. archived from the original on 4 june 2011.