chalti ka naam gaadi (transl.that which moves is called a car) is a 1958 indian musical comedy film directed by satyen bose. starring madhubala with the ganguly brothersashok kumar, kishore kumar and anoop kumar, the film revolves around a middle-aged man who resents women due to some misunderstandings and forbids his younger brothers from marrying.expected by kishore kumar to flop, chalti ka naam gaadi opened to major commercial success, eventually becoming the most successful work of bose and ganguly brothers, as well as madhubala's fourth consecutive major hit of 1958, thus solidifying her position as the top female star of late 1950s and early 1960s.chalti ka naam gaadi has received overwhelming positive reviews from critics for its comical situations, soundtrack, execution and performances. over years, the film has gained classic status and has also inspired several films including badhti ka naam dadhi (1974), saade maade teen (2006) and dilwale (2015).


== plot ==
brothers brijmohan, manmohan and jagmohan sharma run a garage. brijmohan hates women and does not allow any women or pictures of them in his garage unless it is an emergency. one day, while manmohan is on the night shift, a woman named renu comes to the garage seeking help as her car breaks down. renu gets angry at manmohan because he is sleeping when he is supposed to be on duty. manmohan does not like the fact that renu shouted at him and initially refuses to repair her car, but finally agrees. manmohan fixes the car, and renu leaves, forgetting to pay manmohan for his services. he tells his brother brijmohan about this and realizes that renu forgot her purse in the garage. manmohan goes through it and finds a pass to a concert. manmohan goes to this concert to recover his money. when manmohan reaches the venue, he is not allowed to enter as the pass has renu's name on it. not wanting to let go of his money, manmohan waits in renu's car to meet her when she comes out. he, however, falls asleep and renu does not notice him; she drives home and parks in her garage with manmohan in the car. when manmohan wakes up, he gets hungry and looks for some food in renu's garage. a servant in the house sees this and chases manmohan, who manages to escape. on his way home, he notices a few men dumping a corpse on the road and fleeing. when he tells his brothers about his night the next morning, they have a hearty laugh at his expense.
later, renu calls the garage asking for help with her car and assuring she will pay back her fees. manmohan refuses to go to her house, fearing that he will be recognized by renu's servant and will get into trouble; jagmohan decides to go. jagmohan meets sheela in renu's house and the two start talking. jagmohan is, however, afraid of women. he gets nervous because sheela is around and cannot repair the car. after jagmohan takes off (not before drinking 10 glasses of water due to anxiety), renu decides to call manmohan. meanwhile, renu's father is approached by raja hardayal singh, who wants to get his younger brother married to renu. renu's father decides to talk to renu about this, not knowing that raja hardayal and his brother are crooks  manmohan saw raja hardayal's brother dump the corpse.
as renu is falling for manmohan and the crooks desperately want her inheritance, renu and manmohan are captured by hardayal's men. in captivity, they meet kamini, the woman whose photo renu had found in brijmohan's room. brijmohan and kamini were in love, but she was married off to raja hardayal. brijmohan is under the impression that she dumped him for a richer man; as a result, he decides that he never wants to associate with women again. kamini tries to free renu and manmohan, but a guard enters. kamini, however, is able to escape and goes looking for brijmohan. meanwhile, raja hardyal singh captures renu's father and forces him to get renu married to his brother, threatening to kill manmohan if he doesn't. before raja hardayal singh has his way, brijmohan is brought to the scene by kamini. brijmohan, who is a boxing champion, fights raja hardyal singh's men with the help of his two brothers. in the end, brijmohan and his brothers are victorious. manmohan and renu decide to get married. so do brijmohan and kamini, and jagmohan and sheila.


== cast ==
ashok kumar as brijmohan sharma
madhubala as renu
kishore kumar as manmohan "manu" sharma
anoop kumar as jagmohan "jaggu" sharma
sahira as sheela
veena as kamini
k.n. singh as raja hardayal singh
mohan choti as maujiya
sajjan as prakashchand
cuckoo as dancer
minhaj ansari as dancer / singer
asit sen as dead man (prakashchand's gang throw on a road)
helen as dancer / singer
s n bannerjee as renu's father.


== production ==
kishore kumar made chalti ka naam gaadi, hoping it would fail commercially; he wanted to show losses in his income, and thus avoid paying a huge income tax to the authorities. to his disgust, the film became a success; as he did not want to add to his earnings, he gave chalti ka naam gaadi and all its rights to his secretary anoop sharma, who retained the copyright. the income tax case on kishore kumar was not solved even after forty years.


== soundtrack ==
the music is composed by s. d. burman and his son, r. d. burman is the assistant music composer, with lyrics by majrooh sultanpuri. the songs "hum the woh thi" and "ek ladki bheegi bhaagi si" were based on tennessee ernie ford's "the watermelon song" and merle travis's "sixteen tons" respectively.the soundtrack was popular with audience, and was placed at #51 in film companion's list "top 100 bollywood albums".


== reception ==


=== box office ===
chalti ka naam gaadi, the second highest-grossing indian film of 1958, grossed 2.5 crore, including a nett of 1.25 crore at the box office. adjusted for inflation, its gross was equivalent to about 485 crore in 2016, and it remains one of the highest-grossing indian films in the history (when adjusted for inflation).


=== critical reception ===
chalti ka naam gaadi has received overwhelming positive reviews by modern-day critics. author dinesh raheja, writing for rediff.com, said that "if the best screwball comedies are those that continue to connect even with the modern generation, this fifties jest-setter is a sureshot winner." he also commented favourably on madhubala and kishore kumar's chemistry, adding that chalti ka naam gaadi was the finest of the five films they made together.sandipan deb of mint called it "best hindi movie ever made", noting its treatment of female characters:
what is not often mentioned about chalti ka naam gaadi is its portrayal of women. madhubala's character is that of a remarkably liberated woman, driving her own car and determined to be in charge of her life in a male-dominated world. [...] anoop kumar's beloved runs a petrol pump. ashok kumar's former girlfriend was forcibly married off, but he does not think twice about taking her back when they meet 10 years later. i cannot think of another hindi film from the 1950s (or even 1960s or 1970s, in fact) that treats women so equally as men, and in which all the male protagonists are less chauvinistic.


== references ==


== external links ==
chalti ka naam gaadi at imdb