chalte chalte (transl.on the way) is a 2003 indian hindi-language romantic drama starring shah rukh khan and rani mukerji, directed by aziz mirza. the film was screened at the casablanca film festival.


== plot ==
the film begins in a bowling alley, where a group of friends is awaiting the arrival of salim. meanwhile, deepak arrives with his fiance sheetal. when a conversation about love arises, deepak and the rest find it necessary to make sheetal aware that true love does exist. they tell her the story of raj (shah rukh khan) and priya (rani mukerji), two of their closest friends.
raj mathur, a graduate of engineering, is the owner of raj transport, a small trucking company he founded himself. raj is a carefree man who is unorganised, messy, lazy and never on time. although he isn't the richest, he's always happy.
on the other hand, priya chopra is a successful fashion designer from a wealthy family. originally from greece, she lives with her aunt anna, who wants to give her the best in life. priya has her life all planned out  the complete opposite of raj. these two completely different people meet in a car accident when priya crashes her car into raj's truck. though the two get off to a rocky start, they meet again at the wedding of salim and farah, eventually becoming friends. the two slowly fall in love.
raj learns that priya's engaged. desperate, he follows priya to greece, where he continues to woo her. when it's time to part company, priya realises that she is in love with raj. they get married after persuading priya's parents, and arrive in mumbai, where raj welcomes priya into their home.
back to the bowling alley in the present: salim arrives along with farah and announces that today was raj and priya's first wedding anniversary, so they were planning a surprise party. excited, sheetal can't wait to meet the famous raj and priya, but when they do arrive, they're nothing like what they seemed. the two can't stop arguing.
raj feels the pressure to meet the expectations of priya's family and is struggling financially. priya cannot stand to see her husband in this state and secretly asks her former fianc for money. when raj learns the truth, he becomes destructive, and priya runs away to her parents. raj, realizing his error, goes after priya, only to be insulted by her family.
priya decides to leave for greece because she can't stay with raj but can't stay without him. when raj is informed of this, he races to the airport to stop priya, just as he did the year before. he says he will change and that he has a dream of the two of them starting a family together. although priya expresses that she has the same dream, she feels it is impossible for them to be together, so she boards the plane. giving up, raj remembers his oath and sends his talisman to priya. when priya receives the talisman, she too recalls raj's confession. raj returns home to find priya waiting for him. she says that the only way to make their dream come true is to be together. in a playful manner, the two get into another argument but they say that this is how they express their love. they continue to argue as the credits roll.


== cast ==
shah rukh khan as raj mathur
rani mukerji as priya chopra mathur
satish shah as manubhai
lilette dubey as anna mausi, priya's aunt
johny lever as nandu, a roadside drunkard
jas arora as sameer, priya's former fianc
vishwajeet pradhan as a friend
suresh bhagwat as a dhobi
aditya pancholi as a hostile businessman
dinyar tirandaz as irani
rajeev verma as mr. chopra
jayshree t. as mrs. manubhai
meghna malik as farah
suresh menon as a shopkeeper
masood akhtar as a paanwala
gagan gupta as tambi
vani tripathi as a friend
sushmita daan as a flower girl
arun singh as a vegetable seller
akhtar nawaz as a milkman
kamini khanna as female plane passenger
bobby darling as a friend
madhavi chopra as a friend
ashish kapoor
jameel khan as a traffic policeman


== development ==
this was the third film produced by shahrukh khan and juhi chawla's company, dreamz unlimited. the film publicity strategy created by kanchana kodituwakku and dreamz unlimited.
filming took place in india and greece. 2 songs were shot in athens and the island of mykonos.according to khan, rani was initially offered the role of priya, but due to prior commitments, she turned it down. aishwarya rai was then signed for the role, but had to leave the film after some problems with her then-boyfriend, actor salman khan who is said to have disrupted filming. this caused considerable delay in the progress of the film until mukerji agreed to take over the role and save the film.mukerji had a complete makeover for the role, by mac cosmetics india director mickey contractor. contrary to the hindi-media prejudice of fair skin being considered more attractive, they received praise for her new, tanned complexion, including their use of smoky-eye, which was subsequently used in other films.


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film has been conducted by the duo jatin-lalit and aadesh shrivastava.
joginder tuteja of bollywood hungama gave the album 3.5 stars and stated "chalte chalte is a romantic album that should go well with both class as well as mass". according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 18,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's sixth highest-selling.this was one of the last collaborations of shah rukh khan and abhijeet bhattacharya and all the 3 songs sung by him were chartbusters. other artists who contributed to the album are alka yagnik, udit narayan, sonu nigam, sukhwinder singh & preeti & pinky.


=== track listing ===


== box office ==
chalte chalte grossed 30.15 crore (us$4.2 million) in india and $2.81 million (13.13 crore) in other countries, for a worldwide total of 43.28 crore (us$6.1 million), against its 11 crore (us$1.5 million) budget. it had the third highest worldwide opening weekend of the year with figures of 12.38 crore (us$1.7 million). the film earned 20.14 crore (us$2.8 million) during its first week. worldwide, it is the 4th-highest-grossing film of 2003.


=== india ===
it opened on friday 13 june 2003 across 280 screens, and earned 1.50 crore (us$210,000) nett on its opening day, which is the 7th highest first day of the year. in its opening weekend, the film grossed 4.52 crore (us$630,000) nett and is the 7th highest opening of the year. it grossed 8.23 crore (us$1.2 million) nett in its first week. the film earned a total of 19.44 crore (us$2.7 million) nett and is the 6th-highest-grossing film of 2003. when adjusted for inflation, its total nett gross is 69.68 crore (us$9.8 million). it was declared a "hit" by box office india.


=== overseas ===
outside india, it is the second highest opening of the year as it grossed $1.15 million (5.37 crore) in its opening weekend. it went on to gross $1.58 million (7.38 crore) in its first week. the film earned a total of $2.81 million (13.13 crore) and is the 2nd-highest-grossing film of 2003 behind kal ho naa ho.


== critical reception ==
film critic taran adarsh praised the film's writing and performances. he wrote, "chalte chalte clearly belongs to shah rukh khan, an actor par excellence. one actually runs out of adjectives and personifications if asked to describe this performance by the actor."


== awards ==


== references ==


== external links ==
chalte chalte at imdb
chalte chalte at rotten tomatoes
chalte chalte at box office mojo