chal mere bhai(translated: come on, my brother) is a 2000 indian hindi comedy film. the film was produced by nitin manmohan and directed by david dhawan. it stars sanjay dutt, salman khan and karishma kapoor in the lead roles. this was karisma's fourth consecutive portrayal of a character with the name sapna.


== plot ==
this is the story of two brothers, vicky (sanjay dutt) and prem oberoi (salman khan) and how their lives are turned upside down by a girl named sapna (karishma kapoor).
vicky is a business tycoon who runs his family's huge business empire. sapna applies for the position of his secretary. she is an orphan who has just moved to bombay from pune and is currently living with her uncle and aunt (himani shivpuri). sapna doesn't have the required experience to be vicky's secretary, but vicky's father, balraj oberoi (dalip tahil) is impressed by sapna's passion and hires her.
prem is an aspiring actor, much to the chagrin of balraj, who would like prem to also work for the family business. however, prem's grandmother (sushma seth) and vicky support prem's decision to be an actor. he works with a theater director (shakti kapoor) who happens to be sapna's uncle.
sapna is very inefficient at work and vicky is completely sick of her. but when vicky is attacked after work, it is sapna's fast thinking that saves his life. vicky's family invite her and her family to a short vacation on their farmhouse. vicky's family become quite fond of sapna. prem and sapna also fall in love during this time.however, before prem can tell his family that he loves sapna he finds out that his grandmother wants vicky to marry sapna and that vicky has agreed to the proposal. prem doesn't want to break his brother's heart. vicky has been grieving for his late girlfriend (sonali bendre) for a very long time. prem doesn't want to get in his way now that vicky has finally decided to move on. prem tells sapna that he was just fooling around with her. a heartbroken sapna gives in to the pressure of her aunt and uncle and agrees to marry vicky. however, vicky finds out the truth before the wedding and calls them out. sapna and prem are reunited at the end. the last scene implies that vicky finds love again when a new girl (twinkle khanna) joins his office.


== cast ==
sanjay dutt as vikram "vicky" oberoi
salman khan as prem oberoi
karishma kapoor as sapna mehra
dalip tahil as balraj oberoi
sushma seth as dadima, vicky and prem's grandmother
shakti kapoor as mamaji, sapna's uncle
ravi baswani as waiter in a guest appearance
anil dhawan as doctor in hospital
birbal as astrologer
himani shivpuri as mamiji, sapna's aunt
shahbaz khan as rakesh
ghanshyam rohera as nandu, the cook
javed khan as murari
shashi kiran as suri
asrani as family doctor
nagma as sonia in guest appearance
sonali bendre as piya,vicky's beloved who died in an accident, guest appearance
twinkle khanna as pooja, guest appearance
shankar mahadevan as himself in the title sequence
lesle lewis as himself in the title sequence
satish kaushik
divya palat
masshe uddin qureshi
raju shrestha
mangal dhillon
dinesh anand
shiva
suresh bhagwat


== soundtrack ==
according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 12,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's fifteenth highest-selling.all lyrics are written by nitin raikwar, sameer; all music is composed by anand-milind

the music featured in the top 15 best selling albums of 2000..


== references ==


== external links ==
chal mere bhai at imdb