challenge 2 is a 2012 indian bengali action comedy film directed by raja chanda starring dev and pooja bose in lead roles. the film is not a sequel to the 2009 bengali film challenge; it contains a very different storyline. major parts of the movie were shot in malaysia, dubai and mumbai besides kolkata. challenge 2 is a remake of 2011 telugu film dookudu, directed by srinu vaitla and starring mahesh babu and samantha ruth prabhu. the film was blockbuster at box office collection.


== plot ==
debraj roy (tapas pal) is an independent mla of the constituency of debnagar, which is named after him, in west bengal, and is regarded as a champion for the poor and one who have idealistic values. when a truck collides with the car his brother angshuman roy (kushal chakraborty) and he are in, debraj goes into a coma. except for his family, everyone else presumes that he is killed in the accident. years later, his son abhiraj roy a.k.a. abhi (dev) is a police officer in mumbai who fights against the mafia and is on a mission to apprehend a mafia don guru nayak (ashish vidyarthi) who is involved in illegal drug trade, extortion and arms trafficking.
when he heads to kuala lumpur, malaysia in an undercover operation, he meets pooja, the daughter of abhi's senior police officer, madhusudan bakshi (rajatava dutta) and soon falls in love with her. she initially rejects his advances which makes him give up. however, he is successful in the undercover operation and arrests nayak's brother bunty (surajit sen). after returning to india, he again meets pooja and, to his surprise, she reciprocates his feelings. in an attempt to arrest nayak, bunty and the police commissioner is killed and debraj's loyal follower shivu (kaushik chakraborty) reveals to abhi that nayak, along with debraj's rival, apurba ghosh (deepankar de), and debraj's other followers including jagganath (sumit ganguly) and krishnakanto mitro (debesh roy chowdhury) were behind debraj's accident, which makes abhi plot to kill all of them.
when debraj comes out of the coma, the doctors who treated him advise his family that his life is at risk if he encounters or hears anything upsetting, disturbing or shocking. abhi hides the events surrounding the accident and shifts his family to his previously abandoned mansion which is now being used for film making. abhi creates a dummy political set-up at this mansion. in the guise of a reality television program, abhi tricks an aspiring but unsuccessful film actor swarnakamal (kharaj mukherjee) by making him believe that the television show is being sponsored by actor mithun chakraborty's television show, and that mithun chakraborty wants to offer swarnakamal very high remuneration for his realistic performance in the show. on the other hand, an aspiring actor premjit (subhashish mukhopadhyay)  and apurba ghosh are tricked by abhi with a real estate business deal to exploit his criminal nexus.
abhi keeps this drama under wraps from debraj by making him believe that abhi is also an mla revered by people fulfilling his dad's wishes. he marries pooja after gaining her family's consent much to debraj's delight. meanwhile, abhi manages to kill jogonnath and apurba without the knowledge of anybody while debraj believes that they died due to ailments. nayak reaches kolkata to kill abhi and abhi's drama is exposed before everybody except debraj.  abhi killed guru nayak's gang members and others in an encounter while nayak is later killed in a ramlila event. debraj too comes to know about abhi's drama and is happy for the affection his son showed on him.


== cast ==
dev as ips officer abhiraj roy a.k.a. abhi
pooja bose as pooja bakshi
tapas paul as mla debraj roy
ashish vidyarthi as mafia king guru nayak
rajatava dutta as mudhushudhon bakshi
kharaj mukherjee as swarnakamal
surajit sen as bunty
deepankar de as apurba ghosh
laboni sarkar as pooja's mother
subhasish mukherjee as premjit
bharat kaul as police commissioner puulak ghosh
joyjit banerjee as joydeep, abhi's colleague
biswanath basu as babla, film artist supplier
kushal chakraborty as angshuman roy
kaushik chakraborty as shibu, debraj roy's henchman
debesh raychowdhury as krishnakanto mitra
arun bannerjee as akhilesh, abhi's uncle
tulika basu as abhi's aunt
sumit ganguly as jagannath
kunal padhy as the new police commissioner
raj chakraborty as film director (cameo)
arghya basu as a corrupt police officer
rittika sen as liza, pooja's sister
pradip dhar as cool babu
rajat ganguly as anondo, abhi's uncle
jahidul islam shuvo as ips, dev's friend
vashcar dev as ips, dev's friend
mousumi saha as abhi's mother (special appearance in footage)


== release ==
the film released on 19 october 2012 (durga panchami) just before the durga pujo weekend in 270 theatres across india including west bengal, kolkata, mumbai, delhi, bihar, assam, tripura, madhya pradesh and chhattisgarh and is being screened in both single screen and multiplexes. according to  producer mr. mahendra soni  this is the first time a non-double-version bengali flick has been released in 270 theatres across the country and continues its successful run in the non-niche segment of core viewers outside bengal.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the film was scored by jeet gannguli and savvy.


== references ==