chashme buddoor (transl.far be the evil eye) is a 1981 indian romantic comedy-buddy film starring farooq sheikh, deepti naval, rakesh bedi, ravi baswani and saeed jaffrey. the film is directed by sai paranjpye and produced by gul anand and his sister jayshree anand  makhija. the film is about three students; siddharth (farooq shaikh), omi (rakesh bedi) and jai (ravi baswani) at delhi university, who don't go home during summer vacation and how a girl neha (deepti naval) comes into their lives. the remake version directed by david dhawan and the original digitally restored film were both released on 5 april 2013. the lyrics written by indu jain were composed by raj kamal and sung by yesudas and hemanti shukla.


== plot ==
siddharth (farooq shaikh), omi (rakesh bedi) and jomo (ravi baswani) are close friends and roommates who are studying at delhi university. siddharth has completed m.a in economics and is preparing for phd. while siddharth is a studious boy who loves to spend most of his time with books, his other two friends- omi and jomo are mostly busy chasing girls, watching movies or dramas. the only thing common among the three of them is smoking. one day, omi and jomo see a girl (neha) who is new to their neighborhood and try to impress her by their tricks. however, both of them give up after experiencing shameful events. after some days, neha (deepti naval) visits their flat as the salesgirl of chamko washing powder. as soon as jomo and omi see her, they hide quickly. siddharth meets neha for the first time and soon a love story begins. but when his other two friends find out, they decide to plot something to end their relationship and also to seek revenge to the embarrassment inflicted upon them by the girl. initially, they succeed in separating siddharth and neha, but later on repent when they realise that siddharth has started losing his interest in work and study and is most likely to end his life as well. finally, they decide to reunite both the lovers.
the parallel plot runs between omi, jomo, siddharth and lallan miyan (saeed jaffrey). lallan miyan is the local shopkeeper who sells cigarettes to omi and jomo on credit. but as students, they don't clear their debts, lallan miyan tries to follow up with them to get their dues.
a spate of kidnapping (especially of young girls) has started in delhi. one fine day, omi and his friends along with neha's grandmother plan to stage a fake kidnapping and get married. but unfortunately, she is kidnapped by the real gang and the duo is left in the lurch. the later part of the story revolves on how they clear the confusion that she has been going through and how she was kidnapped by real thugs and finally rescued.


== production ==
chashme buddoor was produced by gul anand and jayshree anand- makhija.


== cast ==

farooq shaikh as siddharth parashar
deepti naval as neha rajan
rakesh bedi as omkar omi sharma
ravi baswani as jai lakhanpal aka jomo
saeed jaffrey as lallan miyan
leela mishra as neha's grandmother
amitabh bachchan as himself, cameo appearance.
rekha as herself, cameo appearance.
vinod nagpal as the music teacher


== soundtrack ==
all the songs were composed by raj kamal and were penned by indu jain. singers are k. j. yesudas and haimanti sukla. the film has a popular song "kahan se aaye badra" sung by k. j. yesudas and haimanti sukla.


== remakes ==
the plot of k. bhagyaraj's 1981 movie indru poi naalai vaa had similarities with this movie.
the 1984 malayalam movie odaruthammava aalariyam directed by priyadarshan had borrowed some elements from this film.
2003 movie nayee padosan was partially inspired from this film.
2013 film chashme baddoor was an official adaptation of this movie.


== awards and nominations ==
29th filmfare awards
nominations

filmfare best movie
filmfare best director  sai paranjpye
best actor in comic role  rakesh bedi
best actor in comic role  ravi baswani
best actor in supporting role  saeed jaffery


== references ==


== external links ==
chashme buddoor at imdb
chashme buddoor storyline