the paper chase is a 1973 american comedy-drama film starring timothy bottoms, lindsay wagner, and john houseman, and directed by james bridges.
based on john jay osborn jr.'s 1971 novel the paper chase, it tells the story of james hart, a first-year law student at harvard law school, his experiences with professor charles kingsfield, a brilliant and demanding contract law instructor, and hart's relationship with kingsfield's daughter. houseman earned an oscar for best supporting actor for his performance as the professor. houseman later reprised the role in a tv series of the same name that lasted four seasons, following hart, played by james stephens, through his three years of law school.


== plot ==
james hart (timothy bottoms) starts his first year at harvard law school in a very bad way. in his contract law course with professor charles w. kingsfield jr. (john houseman), hart is unaware that he was to read an assigned case for the first class. when kingsfield immediately delves into the material using the socratic method and asks hart the first question, hart is totally unprepared and feels so utterly humiliated that, after class, he throws up in the bathroom.
hart is invited to join a study group with five other students:

franklin ford (graham beckel), the fifth generation of fords at harvard law school
kevin brooks (james naughton), a married man with a photographic memory, but lacking in analytical skills
thomas anderson (edward herrmann)
willis bell (craig richard nelson), an abrasive individual who is devoted to property law
o'connor (robert lydiard)while out getting pizza, hart is asked by a woman, susan fields (lindsay wagner), to walk her home, as she says she feels uncomfortable about a man who has been following her. hart returns to her house soon after and asks her on a date, after which they begin a complicated relationship: she resents the time he devotes to his studies, while he expects her to provide him with a great deal of attention and wants a firm commitment. when hart and his classmates are invited to a cocktail party hosted by kingsfield, he is stunned to discover that susan is kingsfield's married daughter. (she is, however, separated from her husband and eventually gets a divorce.) she and hart break up and get back together several times.
hart categorizes his classmates into three groups: those who have given up; those who are trying, but fear being called upon in class to respond to kingsfield's questions; and the "upper echelon". as time goes on, he moves from the second classification to the third. late one night, hart and another student break into a secured room of the library and read personal notes kingsfield had written as a law student.
the mounting pressure, as the course nears its end, gets to everyone. when hart gives kingsfield a flippant answer, the professor gives him a dime and tells him, "call your mother. tell her there is serious doubt about your becoming a lawyer." hart calls kingsfield a "son of a bitch" and starts to walk out. surprisingly, kingsfield agrees with his assessment and invites him to sit back down, which he does. brooks attempts suicide and drops out of school. the study group is torn apart by personal bickering. with final exams looming, hart and ford hole up in a hotel room for three days and prepare feverishly.
the film is a faithful adaptation of the novel, although it adds two elements not in the book: hart's first name and middle initial (james t.), and his grade in contract law (93, an a). in both the novel and the film, hart makes a paper airplane out of the unopened letter containing his grades and sends it sailing into the ocean.


== cast and characters ==


=== main cast ===


=== professor charles w. kingsfield jr. ===
there are several possible inspirations for the character. retired harvard law professor clark byse is said to have been the inspiration for the character's position at harvard law school, though not the character's personality. according to john houseman, the inspiration for kingsfield was crusty professor edward "bull" warren, also reflected in the boston globe in 2004. houseman had noted that kingsfield's behavior is actually a toned-down version of warren's famous classroom rudeness, as enshrined in classroom lore, and recounted several examples of the professor's putdowns.
james bridges originally earmarked james mason for the kingsfield role, but he was unavailable. after attempts to cast melvyn douglas, edward g. robinson, john gielgud, paul scofield, and other famous actors in the role, bridges offered it to houseman, who agreed to fly to toronto (where the film's interior sequences were to be shot) for a screen test. bridges called it "fabulous", and houseman accepted the part, thus launching his acting career. he had seldom acted before, but knew bridges from the time he was a stage manager in houseman's ucla professional theater group. houseman then recommended bridges as a writer for the television series alfred hitchcock presents, for which bridges wrote 18 teleplays before establishing himself as a motion picture writer-director.


== production ==
the exterior shots of the harvard law school buildings were filmed on the harvard law school campus, and the library shots were filmed in the harvard andover library at the harvard divinity school. all interiors were shot on stages in toronto. in a 1999 interview, gordon willis said production designer george jenkins "reproduced the harvard law school in the paper chase beautifully." the hotel scene was filmed at the windsor arms hotel. the scene of hart and ford entering a building to take their final exam near the film's end was shot in front of the law school's oldest building, iconic austin hall. most of the extras for the harvard law school venue scenes were then current harvard law students, paid a $25 per diem by 20th century fox.
willis shot the paper chase in anamorphic format due to the "schoolroom and the graphics in the film." he also commented on the cinematography, noting that the composition of the scenes with houseman and bottoms "related to who had command of the situation. we used huge close-ups of john, and demeaning shots of timothy. then as the movie goes along and timothy begins to get on top of it, you'll notice the shot sizes begin to diminish on john and begin to get a little bit bigger on timothyuntil finally they are equal partners shooting back and forth."


== reception ==
vincent canby wrote the film "goes slowly soft like a waxwork on a hot day, losing the shape and substance that at the beginning have rightfully engaged our attention;" he concludes "it takes a long while for the paper chase to disintegrate, and there are some funny, intelligent sequences along the way, but by the end it has melted into a blob of clichs." jay cocks called it a movie of "some incidental pleasures and insights and a great deal of silliness:"
what [writer/director] bridges catches best is the peculiar tension of the classroom, the cool terror that can be instilled by an academic skilled in psychological warfare. his ivy league olympian is kingsfield, a professor of contract law who passes along scholarship with finely tempered disdain. in an original bit of casting, kingsfield is played by veteran theater and film producer john houseman. it is a forbidding, superb performance, catching not only the coldness of such a man but the patrician crustiness that conceals deep and raging contempt.
the university of chicago law school called houseman's rendition of the socratic method "over-the-top", telling prospective students:
john houseman may have won an oscar for his impressive performance, but if anyone ever did teach a law school class like his professor kingsfield, no one at chicago does today. instead, our students discover quickly that the socratic method is a tool and a good one that is used to engage a large group of students in a discussion, while using probing questions to get at the heart of the subject matter. the socratic method is not used at chicago to intimidate, nor to "break down" new law students, but instead for the very reason socrates developed it: to develop critical thinking skills in students and enable them to approach the law as intellectuals.
others disagreed; another reviewer found it accurate:

this is really the only serious flick about law school life. it's brooding and intense, perfectly capturing the dynamic between law professor and student. the movie is worth watching just for actor john houseman's academy award-winning performance as professor kingsfield. every school still has a professor that knows how to absolutely terrify the 1ls  for us at uchicago, that was richard "the hammer" helmholz.  the paper chase's professor kingsfield is like a distillation every one of these scary arch-villain type professors.
on review aggregator rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 83% based on 29 reviews, with an average rating of 7.16/10.  on metacritic, which sampled seven critic reviews and calculated a weighted average score of 67 out of 100, the film received "generally favorable reviews".


== awards and nominations ==
houseman was awarded best supporting actor at the 46th academy awards and the same award from the national board of review. bridges was nominated for a best adapted screenplay oscar. donald o. mitchell and larry jost received an academy award nomination for best sound.the american film institute has placed the film at #91 on its 100 years...100 cheers list.


== television series ==
the film was followed by a television series that ran for one season on cbs (197879) and three seasons on showtime (19831986).


== see also ==
list of american films of 1973


== references ==


== external links ==
the paper chase at imdb
the paper chase at rotten tomatoes
the paper chase at allmovie
the paper chase at the tcm movie database
the paper chase at the american film institute catalog