chaudhvin ka chand (lit.'moon of the fourteenth day / full moon') is a 1960 hindi-language muslim social film directed by mohammed sadiq. this film was super-hit at box-office, one of the top-grossing films of 1960. a production of guru dutt, the film centers on a love triangle between guru dutt, rehman and waheeda rehman, and features music by ravi. after the disastrous box office performance of kaagaz ke phool, guru dutt had to stick back to the idea of producing a commercial project along with an experimental project to protect his studio from ruins. the next commercial venture by the studio was chaudhvin ka chand, which was a huge commercially successful comeback film for guru dutt, which saved guru dutt's production studio from ruins.despite being a commercial venture, the film is considered a classic muslim-social. it was ranked #30 in 2003 outlook magazine poll of 25 leading indian directors for best bollywood movies of all time. filmfare listed it among seven muslim social you must watch. its album was ranked #30 in top 100 bollywood albums by film companion. chaudhvin ka chand is also noted for pioneering the bro code in hindi cinema. the film's title track chaudhvin ka chand ho became especially popular and is noted for picturisation of the song sequence. the song is regarded as one of the most acclaimed romantic ballads in the history of romantic ballads and one of the most loved hindi film songs of all time.


== plot ==
the setting is the city of lucknow in northern india, where islamic culture flourished. two of the three best friends who live in this city have fallen in love with the same woman named jameela. aslam (guru dutt) and nawab (rehman) are the two friends caught in this love triangle with jameela (waheeda rehman). an integral part of any guru dutt film, comic relief was provided by johnny walker, who plays mirza masaraddik shaida.


== cast ==
guru dutt as aslam
waheeda rehman as jameela
rehman as nawab
johnny walker as mirza masaraddik shaida
minoo mumtaz as tameezan
mumtaz begum as nawab's mother
tun tun as naseeban
pravin paul as shaida's mother
s. n. banerjee as thanedaar (shaida's father)
baby farida as shaida's sister


== music ==
guru dutt's music composer of earlier films s. d. burman had warned him not to make kaagaz ke phool (1959 film), which resembled his own life. when guru dutt insisted on making the film, s. d. burman said that would be his last film with guru dutt. hence, the music composing of this film was offered to composer ravi and was critically acclaimed, and the lyrics by his all-time favourite shakeel badayuni. it was a creative choice of guru dutt's to have the title track in color while the rest of the film was in black and white.  the title song, sung by mohammed rafi, became an evergreen hit, and is still popular among masses. the other hit songs from this film are "mera yaar bana hai dulha", sung by mohammed rafi, often played in wedding ceremony and mujra song "dil ki kahani rang layi hai", sung by asha bhosle.


=== track listing ===
ravi has composed the music of the film & shakeel badayuni wrote the lyrics. 


== awards ==
filmfare award for best male playback singer - mohammed rafi (1961) - for "chaudhvin ka chand" (1960)
filmfare award for best lyricist - shakeel badayuni (1961) - for "chaudhvin ka chand" (1960)
filmfare award for best art direction - biren nagthe film was also entered into the 2nd moscow international film festival.


== references ==


== external links ==
chaudhvin ka chand at imdb