chillar party (transl.children's party) is a 2011 indian family comedy film directed by nitesh tiwari and vikas bahl and produced by ronnie screwvala under utv motion pictures and salman khan under his skbh productions (salman khan being human productions). the film has a multiple-cast of debuting child-artists particularly named after movies such as, "silencer", "aflatoon", "shaolin" etc. it also features ranbir kapoor in an item-number. chillar party won the 2011 national film award for best children's film.


== plot ==
this film is about a gang of innocent but feisty kids who lead carefree lives in chandan nagar colony that takes on the big bad world of politics when one of their friend's life is endangered. it starts with an introduction to the lead actors, who live in chandan nagar society. each of the eight children has his own identity and a nickname based on these qualities. akram is the fast bowler (ramashankar), encyclopedia is the mastermind (arjun). not only that, but their whole team has a nickname  chillar party. they explain that they have mainly two enemies with the 'oversized' neighbouring cricket team to whom they always lose, and a dog to whom they have given a name  loose motion, since it has a tendency to make messes. so they develop an enmity against dogs. their hopes are shattered shortly after a boy- fatka who was employed for washing the cars of the society, enters with his dog bhidu. they do everything to throw the boy and his dog out, but become unsuccessful. eventually they develop a friendship with each other as fatka helps them by serving as the lead bowler during the match with the neighbouring cricket team. but their happiness is short-lived when a reckless politician, welfare minister shashikant bhide, enters their life after his personal secretary is attacked by bhidu for hurting fatka.
he announces that in a news telecast, all the stray dogs roaming about in residential buildings in mumbai will be caught and terminated and gives an excuse that it is done so that mumbai becomes safer- and declares the slogan as "safe mumbai and safe mumbaikar". he further informs that the dog can only be saved if the society files a no objection certificate within 1 month. chillar party, shocked by this, strives hard to get the noc- wherein they have to get at least more than 50% votes of the total residents in the society i.e. 31 votes. but they manage only ten votes after 15 days.
to get more votes, they plan out few strategies but in vain. finally organising a chaddi march- marching the streets with nothing on their body except underwears. they are telecast on tv and this gets them 10 more votes. with more hard work and awareness they manage to get another 10 votes counting a total of 30 votes. only 1-day remains to complete the deadline of 1-month as declared by bhide. whilst all this chaos is going on, a t.v channel invites bhide and the chillar party for an interview. seeing this as their last chance, they attend the interview which is being telecast across india. knowing that that is the last day and dog catchers are after bhidu, they pray hard to save him. during the interview they are constantly mocked by bhide and asked if all these dirty tricks and uncultured techniques were taught to them by the textbook. as he asks to stop the telecast, silencer, who doesn't speak at all, speaks for the first time. he opens his textbook and reads out loud "we must always help others" followed by others reading out "a friend in need is a friend indeed" and "we must do what is right". overwhelmed by this the whole audience gives them a loud round of applause. whilst in the society, dog catchers are already searching for bhidu. the paper containing 30 votes is before the secretary, mr. tandon while he's watching the telecast. he resents chillar party and is a close associate of minister bhide. he was asked to give away bhidu since this issue originated in his society. chillar party pleads to leave and the interviewers agree. when they reach the society, they are disheartened as there is no sight of bhidu. suddenly bhidu comes jumping in, wearing a collar reading "bhidu- chandan nagar society". while they were happy seeing bhidu, they see the noc on the desk with 31st sign  belonging to tandon.


== cast ==
irfan khan as fatka
sanath menon as arjun / encyclopedia
rohan grover as rishabh / ronny / ramashanker iyer / akram
naman jain as balwan jhangiani / jhangiya
araav khanna as aflatoon
vishesh tiwari as laxman / second hand
chinmai chandranshuh as lucky / panauti
vedant desai as silencer
divij handa as shaolin
rajesh sharma as l.n tondon
shriya sharma as toothpaste
satyadeep mishra as arjun's father
swara bhaskar as talk show host
aakash dahiya as 'googly'
pankaj tripathi as dubey, minister bhide's manager
shashank shende as minister bhide
indrayudh mandal as kartik
sillo mahava as aunty
bachchan pachera as old watchman
ranbir kapoor an item number (tai tai phish)


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by amit trivedi, while the lyrics were penned by nitesh tiwari, amit trivedi, amitabh bhattacharya and vikas bahl.


=== track listing ===


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===

chillar party received mostly positive reviews from critics. taran adarsh of bollywood hungama gave it 3.5 out of 5 stars and said  "on the whole, chillar party is not just for kids, but for grownups as well. a story of grit and determination, it works not just as an entertainer, but also advocates a message rather strongly. a film that deserves to be tax-exempted so that it reaches out to a wider audience. a small film with a gigantic spirit... encourage this one!" saibal chatterjee of ndtv rated it with 3 out of 5 stars and said  "through the entire first half, the writer-director duo holds the proceedings at a level that is completely in sync with the unpretentious spirit of the film. in the run-up to the climax, however, the film comes precariously close to tying itself up in knots as the child-like aura it builds up begins to teeter on the edge of childishness. mercifully, it stays on its feet and doesn't topple over. for that alone the film deserves at least three stars." zee news gave the film 4 stars and wrote, "chiller party may be a small film. but as cinema goes, in its adroitness, it is much more mature than 99 percent of the films ever made in india. and that, you`ll reckon, is no `small` achievement." sonia chopra of sify awarded it 4 stars saying, "storytelling by co-directors-writers-lyricists vikas bahl and nitesh tiwari is first-rate. they make you deeply connect with the characters". shivesh kumar of indiaweekly awarded the movie 3 out of 5 stars. preeti arora of rediff gave it 3 out of 5 stars and wrote  "chillar party is an enjoyable film with plenty of laughs. do watch this, unless of course you hate kids." vandana krishnan from behindwoods gave the film 3 out of 5 stars describing the film as "fun filled one that is sure to leave you with a smile and moist eyes. humor, emotions, and siddhartha is my best friend entertainment and values- you can't ask for more." oneindia.in gave 3 stars while commenting "on the whole, chillar party is not just for kids, but grownups also will enjoy the film equally. a story of great determination presented in an entertaining way is what makes chillar party a good watch.nikhat kazmi of times of india gave chillar party 2 out of 5 stars and said  "filmmakers need to realize indian teens are extremely smart and are fed on a regular diet of cartoon network and roller-coaster hollywood kiddie's flicks. you got to have a story, adventure drama and pace." soumil shukla of filmitadka rated it with 2.5 out of five stars and wrote in his review  "despite its shortcomings, chillar party succeeds in overcoming a lot of deformations forced by the formula philosophy on this genre of films. if not for anything else, watch it to enjoy the delightful performances from the young actors who are the real heroes of this film."


=== box office ===
chillar party grossed 630 million (us$8.8 million) in india. boxofficeindia, on the basis of the film's nett collections, 10 million (us$140,000), declared it a hit.


=== accolades ===
chillar party won the 2011 national film award for best children's film.
along with this, it also won 2011 national film award for best child artist and best screenplay (original).


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
chillar party at imdb
chillar party at bollywood hungama