chintakayala ravi is a 2008 telugu-language romantic comedy film produced by nallamalupu bujji, and directed by yogi.  the cross over cinema, starring venkatesh, anushka shetty, mamta mohandas in lead roles and venu thottempudi in a supporting role, with songs composed by vishal-shekhar and background score composed by mani sharma. it was a below average grosser at the box office.


== plot ==
chintakayala ravi (venkatesh) works in a bar named cyber wave in new york. he is the head waiter; he works with his three friends who also are waiters at the same bar. he has a soft spot for software engineers because he came to the us with the dream of becoming a software pro. however,unavoidable circumstances prevented him from reaching that goal.
his mother seshamamba (lakshmi) tells everybody in her village in andhra pradesh that her son is an outstanding software engineer in america. ravi is hit hard with a sentiment; for the sole reason of not wanting to hurt his mother's feelings, he continues to tell her the sweet lie that he truly is a software engineer in america.
however, problems arise when seshamamba gets ready to marry her son to lavanya (mamta mohandas), a local village girl because lavanya believes seshamamba when she says that ravi is a software engineer. so, when lavanya asks her childhood buddy, sunitha (anushka), to enquire about ravi, the truth comes out that he's a bar waiter. her family gets angry on knowing that ravi's family lied to them, and when ravi arrives in the village for betrothal, he is subjected to humiliation. what happens later forms the remaining story.
he troubles sunitha because she had got her information wrong about ravi. later,she understood how good a person ravi is when he saves her father. throughout the movie, ravi and sunitha became good friends and ravi plans to find a guy for sunitha to marry. she aims to rejoin ravi & lavanya, but it doesn't work out. ravi had saved srikanth's (venu thottempudi) life while he was in america. srikanth comes to lavanya's home and tries to convince her parents, explaining how good a person ravi is. as srikanth joins hands with lavanya's parents about ravi's marriage with lavanya,ravi and sunitha fall in love with each other, which isn't known until the time of ravi's marriage with lavanya. on knowing the truth, ravi's family ends up getting him married with sunitha


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music was composed by vishal-shekhar. lyrics written by chandrabose. music released on aditya music.


== reception ==
radhika rajmani of rediff.com called it a "proper commercial family entertainer" and praised venkatesh's performance.


== awards and nominations ==
filmfare awards southnominationsbest music director  telugu  vishal-shekhar
best female playback singer  telugu  shreya ghoshal  "merupulaa"
best lyricist  telugu  chandrabose  "enduko"


== references ==


== external links ==
chintakayala ravi at imdb