china gate is a 1998 indian western  action film directed by rajkumar santoshi. it was released on 27 november 1998.
the song "chamma chamma" picturised on urmila matondkar became chart buster and was used in baz luhrmann's film moulin rouge!.


== plot ==
the story begins with col. krishnakant puri and his ten men who were sacked from the indian army for failing in the china gate mission. they belong to the "ghatak" platoon of infantry regiment. krishnakant lives an alienated life after the court-martial. frustrated, one day he is about to commit suicide when a young lady named sandhya knocks on his door.
having witnessed the brutal slaying of her forest officer father, sunder rajan, at the hands of dreaded dacoit jageera, sandhya goes to the col. and asks for his assistance in bringing an end to jageera's rule in the devdurg region. col. krishnakant agrees to assist her and summons ten of his fellow officers and subordinates to assist him in this mission. they assemble at devdurg with the necessary ammunition and arms to combat jageera, not realizing that jageera has influence over the local police detachment, who will prevent krishnakant and his men to possess any guns and weapons. this does not deter the men, and they continue to stay on in devdurg. they gain the confidence of the villagers too. 
the villagers do not know that krishnakant and his men had been dishonorably discharged from the army for cowardice. at the time of the first encounter with the gang of jageera, the team of krishnakant realised that they are out of shape and have lost instincts and fighting capabilities due to age. with the permission of col. krishnakant, major gurung starts to train them again.
one day, jageera captures them with the help of corrupt police officer barot, but they escape finally and in turn capture jageera. col krishan puri and few officers intend to kill him, but leader col. puri hands him over to the police inspector barot. as a result, jageera is again set free and kills maj. sarfaraj.
now the full team of col. krishnakant along with the villagers chase jageera to take final revenge.


== cast ==
om puri... colonel krishnakant puri
amrish puri... colonel keval krishan puri (grenadier)
naseeruddin shah... major sarfaraz khan
danny denzongpa... major ranjit singh gurung (sharpshooter)
samir soni... udit "uditanshu" tandon
kulbhushan kharbanda... major kulbhushan gupta (planner)
tinu anand... captain b'john (batchmate of major gurung from nda) ( explosive expert)
viju khote... nb subedar ghanshyam (gunner)
jagdeep... havaldar ramaiyah
mukesh tiwari... jageera
paresh rawal... inspector baarot
ila arun... gopinath's wife
shivaji satam... gopinath (village sarpanch)
anjan srivastav... havaldar dk pandey
razak khan... sadhuram (lali's uncle)
anupam kher... brigadier anoop kumar / governor (special appearance)
girish karnad... forest officer rajan (sandhya's dad)
rahul singh
mamta kulkarni... sandhya
urmila matondkar in item number "chamma chamma"
benaf dadachandji... lali


== production ==
the film was conceived as a tribute to akira kurosawa's seven samurai. the film was made on the budget of 20 crores, the highest budget bollywood movie at that point of time.


== soundtrack ==
the music for this movie was composed by anu malik and the item song "chamma chamma" became extremely popular, which was later used in hollywood film moulin rouge! and was recreated for the film, fraud saiyyan.
all lyrics are written by sameer.


== references ==


== external links ==
china gate at imdb