chiru navvuto (english: with a smile) is a 2000 indian telugu-language film starring venu thottempudi and shaheen khan. this was venu's second film as an actor after his first hit swayamvaram. this film was also a hit and was later remade into kannada as premakke sai, starring v. ravichandran and in tamil as youth, starring vijay. shaheen khan reprised her role in both remakes. a few scenes were inspired by the 1997 italian movie life is beautiful.


== plot ==
the story revolves around venu (venu), who is an orphan and a talented chef.  his philosophy is to live happily with a smile (chirunavvu) all the time. his uncle (chandra mohan) wants to marry him with his daughter aruna (prema). aruna runs away from the house during the marriage.
venu goes to the city to find a job. there he meets sandhya (shaheen). during a night party, her soft drinks glass was adulterated with alcohol and she was about to be raped. then venu makes a heroic act by saving her from the goondas. sandhya becomes close to venu and both of them are fond of each other. during her birthday party, she announces that she is going to get married soon with pratap (prakash raj). venu got upset. when asked about his disappointment, venu tells sandhya that he loves her, for which she says sorry. venu believes that sandhya still loves him. venu pursues his quest for the love of sandhya. meanwhile, sandhya observes the characters of selfish pratap and smiling venu.
venu gets a call from a police station that aruna was saved by the police when she attempted suicide. her lover cheated aruna after elopement. venu gets her back to his home and heals all her emotional wounds. sandhya observes venu and becomes a big admirer. she feels that venu is her best friend. later it came to know that pratap is aruna's lover who cheated her for the sake of sandhya's property. 
sandhya, caught in confusion, asks her mother about her definition of love. her mother gives the golden words of love saying: "its better to marry a person who loves you than marrying a person whom you love".
those words changed the mind and heart of sandhya and she decides to get back to venu. sandhya turns a runaway bride and goes to venu's house with marriage costumes. but venu, who has his own attitude and wisdom, makes sandhya go back to the marriage. then he takes pratap into a room and blackmails him to reveal about aruna for the dropping out on marriage and gives him a check of 1 crore (which was given by sandhya's father to venu to forget sandhya) and marries sandhya with the support of pratap and sandya's father will. later pratap lies to sandhya's father that venu emotionally blackmailed him to marry sandhya or else he will commit suicide that's why to support his love he sacrificed her. then her father says to him that if he has another daughter he would marry to him and then the film ends with sandhya's father cancels the check which he had given to venu in front of jaw dropped pratap.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film was composed by mani sharma.


== remakes ==
the film had an uncredited remake in hindi called muskurake dekh zara.


== awards ==
nandi awardsbest feature film (gold) - shyam prasad
best first film of a director - g. ramprasad
best screenplay - g. ramprasad
best dialogue writer - trivikram srinivasfilmfare awardsbest music director - mani sharma


== references ==


== external links ==
chiru navvuto at imdb