chirodini tumi je amar 2 is a 2014 a bengali romantic drama film released on 11 july 2014 and directed by soumik chatterjee. it is a remake of the 2012 tamil film vazhakku enn 18/9 directed by balaji sakthivel.it is the sequel to bengali film chirodini tumi je amar. the film stars arjun chakrabarty and urmila mahanta. the story of chirodini tumi je amar 2  portrays the romantic love between two lovers. the soundtrack to the film became very popular upon its release.


== plot ==
a girl, jyoti (urmila mahanta), is being admitted to hospital after she has been attacked and her face burnt with acid. police inspector (kharaj mukherjee) is being mobbed by the media inquiring about the girl, while doctors are continuously trying to bring her back to consciousness. the inspector asks the girls mother (soma chakraborty) whether she knows the perpetrator. the mother says that there is a certain man, who is always stalking her daughter.
bhanu sardar (arjun chakrabarty) is dragged to the police station, pleading and crying that he has not done anything. inspector asks him his details and bhanu tells him he was forced to come to kolkata and work in a factory to support his parents. inspector finds a photo of the girl in his wallet and asks about it. bhanu tells him that he now works at a local street food stall, and one day  scolds him for looking at her daughter. everyday the girl, along with her mother pass by in front of the food stall and he loves her from afar. arjun chakrabarty is revealed as an innocent, due to his pure heart; he is not hardened by the city's cruel, selfish politics and people.
shreya (ena saha) comes to the police station to lodge a complaint against raj (bihu mukherjee), a boy whom she suspects could have thrown acid at jyoti by mistake. shreya starts by explaining her family have taken in jyoti to look after her as both her parents are working. raj is the spoilt son of rich and well connected parents. he starts a friendship with shreya, and while at first she is impressed with him, she drops him after finding he has secretly videoed her on his mobile phone. he attacks her, throwing her off her bicycle. since then, shreya always goes to and from school with her mother. one day, after returning from school, she finds there is no water in the bathroom, and that the tap has been turned off. during this time, raj thinks shreya is alone at home. he rings the front door bell and throws acid at the person who answers- only to find it is jyoti.
after hearing her story, inspector gives instructions to call raj and his mother to the police station, but she avoids the call. they come in the next day, and once separated from his mother, raj soon gives away under pressure and admits his guilt. meanwhile, his mother calls the minister and asks him to help release her son. the minister calls the inspector and makes a deal with him. bhanu is beaten and made to confess guilt, so raj can be released. bhanu refuses to confess until the inspector suggests the money that would have been spent on bailing raj can be used for jyoti's treatment. bhanu loves her, so he confesses. he is sentenced to 10 years imprisonment and inr 5000 as punishment. bhanu's friend (riddhi sen) comes to see his friend and refuses to believe that he is guilty, so bhanu tells him the real story. he in turn tells jyoti the truth and of the unconditional love bhanu has for her. jyoti goes to meet bhanu at court on the day of his hearing, and sees him taken away to the jail. enraged by the injustice she hands the inspector a letter accusing him of sending a poor innocent to jail while allowing the rich to go free. as the inspector looks up at her, she throws acid at his face to avenge bhanu. she is sent to jail for 10 years, but bhanu is freed and raj is arrested for the crime.
the movie ends with bhanu coming to visit his love jyoti along with her mother and his friend. as bhanu calls out for her, her eyes become moist reaching out to him and her veil is blown away revealing the burnt side of her face while he promises her "i will wait for you forever".


== cast ==
arjun chakrabarty as bhanu sardar
urmila mahanta as jyoti
riddhi sen as  bhanu's friend
bihu mukherjee as raj
ena saha as shreya
kharaj mukherjee as police inspector
shantilal mukherjee
soma chakraborty as jyoti's mother
sumit samaddar
imran sarkhel


== music ==
jeet gannguli composed the music for chirodini tumi je amar 2.

all lyrics are written by priyo chattopadhyay, prasen (prasenjit mukherjee); all music is composed by jeet gannguli.


== references ==


== external links ==
chirodini tumi je amar 2 at imdb