chitram! bhalare vichitram!! is a 1991 telugu comedy film. the ensemble cast blockbuster film was directed by p. n. ramachandra rao, which was inspired by the 1989 marathi comedy blockbuster ashi hi banwa banwi. this film's cast of characters includes naresh, subhalekha sudhakar, maharshi raghava, brahmanandam, tulasi, and kota srinivasa rao. upon release, the film received very positive reviews, and remained a cult classic. the film was later remade into kannada as bombat hendthi (1992) and  tamil as aanazhagan (1995).


== plot ==
raja (naresh), sudhakar (subhalekha sudhakar), raghava (maharshi raghava), and brahmanandam (brahmanandam) are good friends and stay together as tenants at gorojanala garudachalam's house (kota srinivasa rao). after being thrown out of the house, they start searching for a new house for rent, but no one is ready to give their house for bachelors.
finally, they land up in a place where the landlady insists on having a family as her tenants. the four bachelors dress up to be a man (sudhakar), his retarded brother (raghava), his father (brahmanandam) and his wife (raja). now raja's (called "prema" and who happens to be in a woman's attire) lady love happens to be the landlady's daughter, and all hell breaks loose.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
vidyasagar, a relatively newcomer at that time, gave a few really good tunes with the notable ones being  "seetalu yerugani" and "maddela daruvei". the melodious former, sung by sailaja and chitra, and shot on the occasion of prema's seemantam ceremony, which is still being played at seemantam functions in hyderabad, is borrowed from the marathi original tune "kuneetari yenaara yenaara guh" (shot similarly on a godh-barai), beautifully customized to suit the telugu/south indian taste.

"brahmachaarulam"
"navvukune mana"
"mahasaya mathuga"
"maddela daruvei"
"seetalu yerugani"


== dubbing for the disguised characters ==
the voice for the female character of naresh (as "prema") was given by the veteran dubbing artiste roja ramani, which enhanced the said role and became one of the major highlights of the movie. she admitted in one of the interviews that this was one of the memorable movies she had dubbed for, having split her sides for most of the scenes involving naresh! she so excellently modulated her voice that it perfectly suited the role and all the scenes involving prema became invariably and hauntingly hilarious. naresh also did great justice to the voice by his brilliant acting and beautifully getting into the skin of the character without any inhibitions usually associated with such roles that militate against natural performance. the voice for the old disguise character of brahmanandam was given by mimicry artist nageswara rao (alias mittipati nageswara rao) to mimic veteran actor nagabhushanam.


== awards ==
nandi awardsnandi special jury award (actor) - naresh (1991)


== references ==


== external links ==
chitram bhalare vichitram at imdb