chor machaye shor (transl.the thief makes noise) is a 1974 hindi movie produced by n. n. sippy and directed by ashok roy. the film stars shashi kapoor, mumtaz, danny denzongpa, madan puri and asit sen. asrani earned a filmfare nomination for best performance in a comic role, the only nomination for the film. the music is by ravindra jain. the film became a "superhit" and earned the second spot at the box office in 1974. because of the film's success, the film's producer (n.n. sippy), cast (shashi kapoor, danny denzongpa, asrani, madan puri) and music composer (ravindra jain) teamed up again for fakira (1976), which also became a box office hit.
"le jayenge le jayenge" is a very popular song from the film, which had a key tagline that dilwale dulhaniya le jayenge turned into a later blockbuster film title.
the film was later remade in telugu as bhale dongalu.


== plot ==
vijay (shashi kapoor) is an engineer, who is in love with a rich girl named rekha (mumtaz).  rekha's snobbish father disapproves because vijay is not wealthy, and so he has arranged for her to be married to a son of an evil politician. the evil politician is played by madan puri. rekha's father and the politician frame vijay for a crime that he didn't commit, and he goes to jail. when he's in jail, he becomes friends with three other prisoners. all four men escape from jail. after vijay reconnects with rekha, they all go to a small village called shantinagar and help save the village from the evil politician and the bandits that terrorize the town. the evil politician is arrested. rekha's father feels remorse and accepts vijay. vijay and his three prisoner friends go back to jail. however, the film ends on an optimistic tone indicating that their good deeds will be rewarded (i.e. that their prison sentences will be shortened).


== cast ==
shashi kapoor ... vijay sharma
mumtaz ... rekha
asrani ... bhalua
tarun ghosh ... kalua
danny denzongpa ... raju ustad
madan puri ... seth jamunadas
kamal kapoor ... 	jagdish, rekha's father
asit sen ... thanedar
chaman puri ... mukhiya
ram mohan ... daku ranjit singh
uma dutt ... jailor
sajjan  ... amritlal
meena t. ... chandramukhi
chandrima bhaduri ... mausi
shyam kumar ... daku rupa singh
moolchand ... the stout prisoner
master chintu
hangama ... bhukelal, prison cook


== soundtrack ==
the song of this movie was composed by the blind music composer, late ravindra jain. this was his first movie as music director. all the songs featured in the film were evergreen songs. the lyrics of 'le jayenge' and 'ek dal par' were written by inderjeet singh tulsi. the rest of the song lyrics were written by ravindra jain.


== trivia ==
this was the first film where shashi kapoor paired with mumtazravindra jain's first film as music directorthe song 'ek dal par tota bole' is shot in mahabaleshwar, the famous 'elephant head point' can be seen in the background.the fort shwon in the movie is pratapgadh fort in maharashtra.


== references ==


== external links ==
chor machaye shor at imdb