chup chup ke (english: quietly, quietly) is a 2006 indian hindi-language comedy drama film directed  by priyadarshan. originally titled as khatta meetha, the story of the film is adapted from the malayalam film punjabi house (1998), with a tagline of "love meets confusion meets love." the film has shahid kapoor and kareena kapoor in their third film together along with actors, neha dhupia, sunil shetty, paresh rawal, rajpal yadav, shakti kapoor, om puri and anupam kher. neha dhupia worked in priyadarshan's malayalam film minnaram in 1994 as child artist. 


== plot ==
jeetu (shahid kapoor), the son of retired teacher jaidev prasad (anupam kher), is constantly getting himself and his father into trouble because of his inability to properly manage money and has run many failed businesses. plunging them both into debt, jeetu breaks off his engagement with his promised fianc, pooja (sushma reddy) and decides to commit suicide by throwing himself into the sea. jeetu thinks that by killing himself, he can do something right for once since his father can use the money from his life insurance to pay off his debts. however, it does not go as planned and jeetu is found tangled in some nets by a pair of fishermen, gundya (paresh rawal) and bandya (rajpal yadav).  
gundya owes money to a gujarati businessman, prabhat singh chauhan (om puri). they find a note containing people's names with the amount written next to the name in jeetu's pocket, which makes them mistakenly think jeetu is rich and has lent money to these people, rather than in debt. jeetu does not want to reveal too much, and therefore pretends to be mute and deaf. back home, jeetu's family is denied insurance, stating unconfirmed death (owing to a lack of body), putting them in a difficult situation of repaying jeetu debts. 
prabhat takes away gundya's boat, the only source of gundya's income so that he pays back the money he owes him. the two fishermen visit prabhat's house to request back their boat, only to be asked by prabhat to leave something of value in return as a guarantee. gundya cunningly makes prabhat believe that jeetu is his loving nephew and leaves both jeetu and bandya as the guarantee.
later, it is revealed that prabhat's niece shruti (kareena kapoor) is mute too, but not deaf. her overprotective brother mangal (sunil shetty) wants her to get married, however, her muteness makes her an undesirable match. one night, jeetu gets drunk, and begins to sing but is caught by  shruti and her cousin meenakshi (neha dhupia) who hear him (and consequently learn of his secret). they promise to keep his secret but in return, he must do something for shruti. a greedy bridegroom is interested in marrying shruti only for her wealth; so meenakshi tricks jeetu into pretending to be shruti's lover, which eventually results in the marriage being broken off. mangal arrives and finds jeetu with a love note for shruti that meenakshi wrote. not realising jeetu is pretending to be mute and deaf, mangal attacks him and only stops upon being told of jeetu supposed disability. regretful, mangal gives jeetu a job in his business and prabhat extends gundya's loan time. 
meenakshi finds out that jeetu is in debt and she begins to distrust him after learning about the troubles his debts are causing his family. jeetu eventually finds out that since his body has not been found, his family is still being hassled for his debts as the insurers have not paid. jeetu is involved in a car crash with prabhat who, at the time, was carrying a lot of money. meenakshi tells the police about her suspicions and they beat jeetu mercilessly. her and shruti's views about him change however when prabhat announces that jeetu was the one that saved him and took him to hospital. 
a remorseful  shruti and meenakshi, trick prabhat into giving them money which they send to jeetu's village through bandya to repay his debts by having bandya pretend to be jeetu business partner. bandya returns from the village and tells jeetu that pooja is married now. unaware that pooja believing herself to be jeetu's widow, is living with jeetu's family. 
at the same time, shruti confesses her love for jeetu. mangal finds out about the romance and requests jeetu marry shruti after jeetu reveals he is not deaf and mute. free of debt, he agrees to marry shruti, having fallen in love with her too. later mangal sends gundya and bandya to deliver a suitcase of money to jeetu family to secure there financial well-being. 
however, while delivering the money they inadvertently reveal jeetu is alive. shocked jeetu dad demands they take him to visit jeetu. jaidev arrives at prabhat's house during jeetu and shruti's engagement ceremony and sees him alive. 
jeetu comes out to speak to his father, who reveals that pooja is living as his widow. jaidev implores him to return home and marry pooja, however, gundya and bandya urge jaidev to leave. jeetu later goes back home to speak to his family but they demand he marry pooja, and gundya and bandya bring him back. on the day of the wedding, jeetu's family intrude on the marriage, wanting him to return and marry pooja instead. however, when pooja learns that shruti is mute, she has a change of heart and tells jeetu to marry shruti. jeetu and shruti get married and live happily ever after.


== cast ==
shahid kapoor as jeet prasad sharma (jeetu) / kanhaiya
kareena kapoor as shruti singh chauhan / shruti jeet prasad sharma
neha dhupia as meenakshi singh chauhan
suniel shetty as mangal singh chauhan
rajpal yadav as bandya
paresh rawal as gundya
shakti kapoor as natwar jhunjhunwala
anupam kher as jaidev prasad sharma
om puri as prabhat singh chauhan
manoj joshi as mohan prakash rao
asrani as sharmaji
sushma reddy as pooja rao sharma, jeets wife
amita nangia as mrs. sharma, jeet's mother
dileep as jeet prasad sharma (voice)


== release and reception ==
the film released on 9 june 2006 in india. chup chup ke received generally mixed reviews. rediff.com critic sukanya verma praised the cinematography and paresh rawal and rajpal yadav's comedic performances. she also commented that the romance between shahid kapoor and kareena kapoor lacked chemistry. the times of india reviewer also thought that the romance between shahid and kareena was not believable and also criticised the lack of humour. the film grossed 255 million at the box office worldwide.


== soundtrack ==

all lyrics are written by sameer; all music is composed by himesh reshammiya.


== references ==


== external links ==
chup chup ke at imdb 
chup chup ke at bollywood hungama