cid unnikrishnan b.a. b.ed. (malayalam: cid  b.a. b.ed) is a 1994 indian malayalam-language detective comedy film starring jayaram, maniyanpilla raju, jagathy sreekumar, rohini and sukumaran. this comedy was written by sasidharan arattuvazhi and directed by rajasenan. it was made as an homage to cid nazir (1971).


== plot ==
unnikrishnan (jayaram) is a b.a. graduate in a village who wants to become a secret agent like his idol, prem nazir who had acted in various movies as a detective. his parents (oduvil unnikrishnan and k. p. a. c. lalitha) and his girlfriend dhamayanthi (chippy) support him, but unnikrishnan still cannot find a job. dhamayanthi's father (babu namboothiri), who is a friend of unni's father arranges a trainer rishikeshan nair (janardhanan) to train unni. rishikeshan nair who told everyone that he was a trainer in a police training academy was actually a cook in the academy canteen. after a few days, rishikeshan nair absconds with some valuables from unni's house. unnikrishnan later gets selected as a trainee in a private detective agency called secret files. the boss (narendra prasad) assigns unni a task of investigating arundhathi (rohini), the daughter of a businessman ananthapadmanabhan (sukumaran) as an assignment to evaluate him. while investigating with his friend and sidekick kunju (indrans) he faces two rivals, prem shankar (maniyanpilla raju), who poses as a gentleman who pretends to love arundhathi, and oommen koshy (jagathy sreekumar), who is a working as a gardener in her house. they are from the same detective agency investigating the same case as the boss says that whoever does best will be selected to the agency. all three try to investigate in their own ways. unnikrishnan poses as a salesman of peter & peter, befriends ananthapadmanabhan. he manages to make a bad impression about prem shankar in front of ananthapadmanabhan. oommen tries to flirt with the cook clara (kalpana). from ananthan, unni learns that arundhathi has had a deadly disease from childhood and she has to take medicines regularly. that's the reason she is still unmarried. after arundhathi's birthday party, she catches oommen and makes him confess that he is in fact a private detective. oommen tells her about others and she reveals to the three of them that she is in fact revathi, anathapadmanabhan's niece. the actual arundhathi is in us,  doing her studies. dejected, the trio decides to quit the investigation. but prem shankar, who has started to develop feelings towards revathi, asks the help of the other two to find out what is the disease of revathi. they find that she is actually healthy and the medicines she is taking from childhood are just vitamin tablets. they kidnap the family doctor of ananthan and he tells them that ananthan wants revathi unmarried as all the properties are of ananthan's late brother, who is the father of revathi. so he fabricated a story about her disease to make her believe that she cannot live happily. they inform revathi about this and she is shocked to hear about her uncle's actual intentions. but ananthan gets to know about these happenings and kidnaps dhamayanthi, who had come to the city with her father as she was worried about unni. ananthan makes an offer to exchange dhamayanthi for bond papers signed by revathi that all the properties will belong to ananthan. revathi signs the papers and dhamayanthi is rescued, but unni burns the papers using a matchstick trick taught by rishikeshan nair. a fight occurs where all of ananthan's men are defeated and revathi asks them to spare ananthan as she was bought up by him. in the end, all three are selected into the secret files and the boss asks them to take a case in somewhere north of india. all three say they need a vacation as they had found love. the movie ends with the three agreeing to take unni's sidekick as their assistant.


== cast ==
jayaram as cid unnikrishnan b.a., b.ed
maniyanpilla raju as cid prem shankar m.a., llb
jagathy sreekumar as cid oommen koshy m.a., ml
chippy as dhamayanthi, unnikrishnan's girlfriend
rohini as arundhathi nair / revathi, prem shankar's love interest
kalpana as clara, oommen koshy's love interest
oduvil unnikrishnan as pappunni, unnikrishnan's father
k. p. a. c. lalitha as padmavathy, unnikrishnan's mother
sukumaran as ananthapadmanabhan, revathi's uncle
narendra prasad as the boss of secret files
indrans as kunju, unnikrishnan's friend & assistant
janardhanan as rishikeshan nair
babu namboothiri as vasudevan, dhamayanthi's father
bobby kottarakkara as eraniel chinnappa
gayathri as uma, unnikrishnan's sister
swapna ravi as prabhavathy, revathi's aunt
kalady omana as kamalakshi, dhamayanthi's mother


== soundtrack ==
the film had soundtrack composed by johnson and lyrics by bichu thirumala and i. s. kundoor.


== box office ==
the film was a commercial success.


== references ==


== external links ==
cid unnikrishnan b.a., b.ed. at imdb