c. i. d. is a 1965 indian telugu-language action film, produced by nagireddy-chakrapani under the vijaya productions banner and directed by tapi chanakya. the film stars n. t. rama rao, jamuna with the music composed by ghantasala. the film is a remake of the tamil movie dheiva thaai (1964).


== plot ==
chalapathi (gummadi) is a poker player who loses all his entire wealth due to his vices. once he had a fight with a fellow gambler kumar brother of a police officer s. p. ramadasu (mikkilineni) and kumar dies. chalapati runs away and comes under a running train, everyone feels that chalapathi died. ramadasu helps chalapathi's wife parvathi (pandari bai) getting her a job as a nurse and for her son's ravi's education. ravi (n. t. rama rao) grows up and becomes a cid inspector. chalapathi is still alive by changing his face in the name of baba, who externally behaves like a money lender, but internally he is a big gangster. he and his gang rob a bank in bombay and ravi takes up to unfold the case. baba and his associate uddandam (rajanala) tries to kill ravi so many times, but ravi escapes with bravery & courage and almost surrounds the gang. meanwhile, kumar's daughter vasantha (jamuna) is brought up by ramadasu and comes in contact with ravi, they fell in love and their marriage gets fixed. at that time ramadasu's mother (hemalatha) comes to know ravi's father is the killer of his son, so, she breaks up the match and ravi & vasantha's love story becomes a tragedy. but after some time, on request of parvathi and convincing ramadasu, the match is again set up. ravi is under suspicion that baba is behind all these crimes, so, once he goes to baba's shop and asks for money in exchange for his pocket watch. baba orders his associate uddandam (rajanala) to kill ravi, but he sees parvathi's picture in the watch and comes to know that ravi is his son. meanwhile, uddandam throws a knife and baba comes in between and gets hurt. ravi joins him in the hospital, then nurse parvathi recognizes her husband. parvathi requests baba not to reveal the truth to ravi because she hid the real version of the facts. after recovery, baba invites ravi to his shop and he visits along with vasantha, where baba presents a necklace and chain to him and ravi takes them by force. but parvathi returns the chain to baba and asks him not to keep any contact with her son. uddandam takes it as an advantage, makes a picture of this and complains to the police that ravi has taken a bribe and he is suspended. ravi asks for a chance to prove his innocence. in anger for that, ravi goes to take revenge against baba. at that same time, knowing about ravi's suspension baba beats uddandam and he revolts against him. in that quarrel baba kills uddandam and runs away. ravi chases him, baba hides in ravi's house. only when ravi is about to arrest him, parvathi begs ravi to leave him, but ravi is not ready to listen, so, she dies at baba's feet. in the end, ravi comes know that baba is his father chalapathi through ramadasu and his mother has sacrificed her entire life for him. finally, the movie ends with the marriage of ravi & vasantha.


== cast ==
n. t. rama rao as ravi
jamuna as vasantha
gummadi venkateswara rao as chalapathi / baba
rajanala as udandam
mikkilineni as s. p. ramadasu
ramana reddy as vyaghreswara bhagavatar
pandari bai as parvathi
hemalatha as avva
meena kumari as chenchela


== soundtrack ==
music composed by ghantasala. lyrics were written by pingali nagendra rao. music released by audio company. 


== references ==


== bibliography ==
rajadhyaksha, ashish; willemen, paul, eds. (1998) [1994]. encyclopaedia of indian cinema (pdf). oxford university press. isbn 0-19-563579-5.


== external links ==
c. i. d. at imdb