circus is a 2009 kannada film directed and produced by dayal padmanabhan who previously acted with ganesh in gaalipata. music was composed by emil. the film stars ganesh and archana gupta in the lead roles, archana gupta who had earlier done leading role in telugu film andamaina manasulo. the film released statewide on 15 january 2009.


== plot ==
circus has a tag line along with its sub title nodi maja maadi. dayaal, who spoke with emotional overtones in the film, said that he will be completing the film after sixty days of schedule. he said, nearly seventy percent of the shooting will be done near or on a train. i had to toil hard to get the required permission for the shoot. the story starts from mysore station and ends in bangalore station. director has taken permission from railway authorities to shoot the film in railway station and tracks in mysore, konkan railway and railway line stretching in sakleshpura and subramanya ghat section.a joke gone bad, the story is about dhanush (ganesh) and his group of friends who live in the railway colony and their meeting point is the railway station.
dhanush is the leader of the gang and just to have some fun, they decide to send a letter stating on a particular date a train travelling from mysore to bangalore  will be exploding. however, what they realize later after posting is that one of the friend's address is there on the letter.
in a hurry, they get into the rms bogie of the train and after a lot of twists finally manage to extract the letter from the pile. in this process, what dhanush discovers is that the same day a real plot has been hatched by the terrorists to blow up the gandhadagudi express so he decides to locate it and foil the plan.
in the process of his journey, the friends take a break at one of the houses where priya (archana gupta) and in no time, love blooms between dhanush and her. so what happens to gandhadagudi express? is dhanush successful in his attempts? all this forms the rest of the story.


== cast ==
ganesh
archana gupta
pawan kumar
avinash bharadwaj
murali
mithra
sai krishna
nagashekhar
laya kokila
renuka prasad
yathi raj
shivaji rao jadhav
dayal padmanaabhan
triveni rao
k. v. manjayya
rekha das
padmaja rao
avinash
sri crazymindz
chi. guru dutt
dharma
muni
kempe gowda
achyuth kumar
sadhu kokila
vaijanath biradar
arun sagar


== box office ==
the movie received mixed to positive reviews from critics as well as audience and was declared average grosser at box office. the film completed 50 days.


== soundtrack ==
the official soundtrack contains six songs composed by emil with lyrics penned by kaviraj, yogaraj bhat and manjunath rao. the audio of the film released on 15 december 2008. the opening lines of the song jeeva hoovagide was used from the popular song of same name (i love you) from the 1981 movie nee nanna gellalare.


== home media ==
the movie was released on dvd with 5.1 channel surround sound and english subtitles and vcd.


== references ==


== external links ==
circus at imdb