classmates is a 2007  telugu drama feature film starring sumanth, ravi varma, sharwanand, sadha, sunil, and kamalinee mukherjee. k. vijaya bhaskar directed the film and sravanthi ravi kishore produced it. the film released on 20 april 2007. it is a remake of the 2006 malayalam movie classmates.


== plot ==
ravi (sumanth), raaji (sadha), satish (ravi varma), razia (kamalinee mukherjee), and baddu (sunil) were classmates and a group of friends in the 1990s. after several years, they all meet again at their 10-year reunion.  everyone is present except for murali (sharwanand), who died during their last semester.
back in college, ravi and raaji fall in love with each other. satish, eager to join politics, wants to marry raaji, who is the daughter of a powerful politician. he encourages raaji to stand in the college elections, opposing ravi, hoping to drive a wedge between the couple. he eventually succeeds in doing so.
in an ensuing incident, murali dies suddenly. everybody thinks that murali died of an asthmatic attack. subsequently, ravi abruptly drops out of college during their ma final semester  and leaves  without telling anyone.  
raaji thinks that ravi left because of their ongoing conflict. she tries to find his whereabouts but fails.
ravi later went to delhi to join for upsc coaching clases and studied really hard and cleared the exam and became a successful ias officer.
in the present, somebody  tries to kill ravi by strangulation. the police investigate but find no clue. later it is revealed that razia, the shy and reserved girl in the group, was the one responsible. her reason is that she happens to overhear ravi's confession to raaji, where he reveals that he was accidentally responsible for murali's death. razia and murali were secretly  lovers, and her motivation was revenge. ravi and razia subsequently reconcile. so do raaji and ravi and they decide to get back together. once the truth is revealed, the entire group reconcile. 
they leave the college reunion happy, promising that they would all meet again.


== cast ==
sumanth as ravi kiran ias, district collector
sadha as rajeshwari "raji"
sharwanand as murali
kamalinee mukherjee as razia
ravi varma as satish
sunil as baddu
shiva reddy as satish's friend
kota srinivasa rao as murali's father
giri babu as principal
tanikella bharani as hostel warden
sudha as murali's mother
uttej as hostel boy
chitti babu as peon
karuna as baddu's wife
ahuti prasad
raghu babu as police inspector
rajitha


== reception ==
the movie was critically acclaimed and a hit.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by koti and all lyrics were written by sirivennela seetharama sastry.


== references ==


== external links ==
idle brain review 
classmates at imdb