click is a 2010 indian hindi-language supernatural horror film directed by sangeeth sivan. starring shreyas talpade, sadha sayed, sneha ullal, rehan khan, and chunky pandey. it is the remake of 2007 tamil film sivi which is itself a remake of 2004 thai film shutter.


== plot ==
avinash avi mehra is an ace photographer who is in a live-in relationship with sonia, a model. one night while returning from a party, the couple accidentally hit a young girl with their speeding car. as sonia was driving the car, to avoid further complications, avi insists on them fleeing from the accident scene. but trouble starts for the couple soon after. while strange white marks begin to appear in avi's photos, sonia starts having spooky experiences. avi also develops a severe neck pain and even though he does not appear to be overweight, a scale reveals that he weighs 120 kilograms (264.6 pounds). avi, too, starts having experiences similar to sonia's.
the couple is petrified when all of avi's best friends commit suicide in a similar manner. it then comes to light that the spirit haunting them all has a connection to avi's college life. meanwhile, sonia finds out that avi was friends with a girl named aarti kaushik during his college days. as avi and sonia are still being haunted by aarti they go and visit her, but realize that aarti is dead, having apparently committed suicide by using a knife. aarti's mother believes that she is still alive, thinking that she is merely ill and will recover.
on the way home aarti continues to haunt avi and sonia, and again during the night at the hotel she also haunts avi in his sleep, ending up with him being thrown off the fire escape.
later avi is in the hospital and sonia tells him that aarti will be cremated, and they visit her funeral before returning to their home town. sonia finds some photos of aarti, where she is crawling to get something. as she follows the pattern indicated by aarti, sonia discovers that avi's best friends (who later committed suicide) are raping aarti.
when sonia talks to avi about this dark secret, he tells her that he only wanted aarti to understand his feelings, but that when his best friends tried to talk to her, aarti hurt avi's friend tarun, who became angry and with his friends raped her. avi claims that when he entered the room he was shocked at the scene and tried to help her, but that tarun then said that avi had asked them to rape her as a way of avoiding jail, and accused avi of planning to do this to her and having one of avi's friends taking the pictures.
avi then tells sonia that the reason he kept the photos was to remind him that he failed to protect aarti and say he is the guilty one. but sonia leaves him and wishes him that aarti may forgive him. later on avi attempts to kill himself in the same way his best friends did, but as a polaroid camera clicks towards him, he sees aarti sitting on his shoulders. avi is suddenly thrown through the window, and ends up in the hospital, where it is revealed that the reason why she was sitting on his shoulders was that aarti had still loved avi.
as sonia makes another photograph of avi, she speaks to aarti, asserting that one day she will let go as the reflection in the mirror shows aarti still leaning on avi's back.


== cast ==
shreyas talpade as avinash "avi" mehra
sadha sayed as sonia
sneha ullal as aarti kaushik
rehan khan
chunky pandey as manu sharma
jyoti dogra
avtar gill as ali bhai
riya sen	 ...	special appearance
shishir sharma as aarti's father
kavitta verma


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by shamir tandon and released by t-series. all lyrics were penned by shabbir ahmed.


== box office ==
the film grossed 36 crore (us$5.0 million) and was a box office flop.


== legacy ==
the film was later dubbed and released in tamil as monica house during january 2016.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
click at imdb