clockstoppers is a 2002 american science fiction action comedy film directed by jonathan frakes and produced by gale anne hurd and julia pistor. the film stars jesse bradford, paula garcs, french stewart, michael biehn, robin thomas, and julia sweeney.
the film was produced by nickelodeon movies and distributed by paramount pictures.


== plot ==
the nsa-funded quantum tech (qt) corporation has slated a project to develop hypertime, a technology which allows the user's molecules to speed up to the point where the world appears in standstill. the nsa's leader moore ends the project due to its high amount of risk. however, qt's ceo henry gates plans on using the technology to control moore and dominate the world. he uses the prototype to stretch the weekend in order to give his lead scientist earl dopler time to fix the remaining glitch in the technology after his henchmen richard and jay prevent earl's incognito departure at the airport. however, earl being in hypertime for too long has resulted in him aging rapidly in real time, with his molecular age continued at the same rate despite time slowing down.
however, initially unknown to gates, dopler had sent a prototype to his former colleague dr. george gibbs. gibbs' son zak, with whom he has a strained relationship, discovers the watch accidentally and initially uses it for fun. zak wins the heart of francesca, a new venezuelan girl at school. once gates finds out about the leaked prototype, he sends his henchmen after zak, who break into his house and search for evidence. upon learning about the ulterior motive of qt corporation, zak sets out to warn his father of the danger he could be in.
a chase ensues, with zak crashing the van into a river, thus damaging the watch. he awakes in the hospital and barely evades jay and richard. with the police having accused him of stealing a van, he then searches for a hiding spot. in a bid to retrieve the watch, qt corporation enlists the help of national security agencies and portray zak, his father and dopler as wanted fugitives. zak goes on the run with francesca, locating the hotel that gibbs was staying at, with dopler also in pursuit of gibbs. however, qt reach gibbs first and kidnap him.
zak and francesca wander the streets aimlessly before doppler captures them in the garbage truck. however, francesca knocks dopler out and she and zak take dopler hostage. dopler reluctantly agrees to help save gibbs, helps mend the broken watch, and creates guns which can take someone out of hypertime and back into normal time. the guns are loaded with paintballs filled with frozen nitrogen, and the low temperature "freezes" a person back into normal time.
with dopler's help, zak and francesca break in, but get caught by qt. the two are thrown in a cell with zak's dad. zak accelerates while in hypertime and becomes "light", helping the others break out as nsa agents arrive and defeat gates' goons. gates knocks francesca out of hypertime and prepares to do the same to zak and his dad until dopler arrives and defeats him. gates and his henchmen are arrested, and the watches are confiscated.
dopler uses the machine he was building to reverse his aging effects of hypertime, but it inadvertently changes him back into a teenager (miko hughes), meaning he will have to live with the gibbs family for a few years, though he still has the voice of his full grown self. zak enters a relationship with francesca, reconciles with his father, reunites with his family, and earns a car he wanted. as zak speeds off in his car with his sister kelly, francesca, and younger dopler, it is revealed that he has not returned the watch and continues to have fun in hypertime.


== cast ==
jesse bradford as zak gibbs, a boy who finds a time-stopping watch.
paula garcs as francesca, a venezuelan girl who moves to zak's town.
french stewart as earl dopler, a scientist that was unwillingly brought back into the services of qt corporation.
miko hughes as young earl dopler
michael biehn as henry gates, the ceo of qt corporation.
garikayi mutambirwa as meeker, zak's best friend.
robin thomas as dr. george gibbs, a scientist who is the father of zak and the colleague of earl doppler.
julia sweeney as jenny gibbs, the mother of zak.
lindze letherman as kelly gibbs, the sister of zak.
grant marvin as prof. jenning
jason george as richard, an agent who works for henry.
linda kim as jay, a silent agent who works for henry.
ken jenkins as moore, an agent of the nsa
jonathan frakes (uncredited cameo) as a bystander
judi m. durand as the uncredited voice of the q.t. computer
jenette goldstein as doctor


== soundtrack ==


== home media ==
clockstoppers was released on vhs and dvd on august 13, 2002.  warner home video (who releases paramount titles on dvd and blu-ray under license, as paramount themselves have moved to digital-only distribution) reissued clockstoppers on dvd on september 24, 2013.


== reception ==
on rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 29% based on 85 reviews, with an average rating of 4.81/10. the website's critics consensus called it "a pleasant diversion for the young teens, but a waste of time for anyone older." on metacritic it has a weighted average score of 40 out of 100, based on 24 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "b+" on an a+ to f scale.roger ebert of the chicago sun-times gave it 2.5 out of 4, and wrote: "the movie has been produced by nickelodeon, and will no doubt satisfy its intended audience enormously." he also notes that it does not cross over, and offers little for parents or older brothers and sisters. robert koehler of variety called it "a blandly conceived youth adventure lacking zing or style."clockstoppers opened at a number five at the box office ranking in $10.1 million in its first opening weekend, the following week it went down to #7 where it spent a week more. the film grossed a total of $38.8 million against a budget of $26 million.


== references ==


== external links ==
clockstoppers at imdb
clockstoppers at box office mojo