cold eyes (korean: ; rr: gamsijadeul; lit. "stakeout" or "surveillance") is a 2013 south korean  action thriller film starring sol kyung-gu, jung woo-sung, han hyo-joo, jin kyung and lee junho. a remake of 2007 hong kong film eye in the sky, the film is about detectives from the surveillance team of a special crime unit who work together to take down a bank robbing organization.it made its north american premiere at the 2013 toronto international film festival, and also screened at the 2013 busan international film festival in the open cinema section.


== plot ==
ha yoon-joo joins a police division where the members are largely unarmed and don't wear uniforms. led by a man named hwang, the division avoids arresting criminals and focuses exclusively on following them around to gather information. the surveillance team immediately runs into trouble when they can't identify any of the robbers due to their masks and their efficiency in robbing the bank. in response, hwang, ha, and six other officers spend several weeks wandering around the city streets, tagging after people who match the criminal's physical description. when they finally find him, they put cameras outside his apartment.
meanwhile, james, the leader of the criminals, wishes to quit his line of work, but his elderly mentor responds by sending a man to kill him, whom he successfully defends against. when james's subordinates confer to discuss the next mission, they are successfully tracked by hwang's officers who call in a swat team to subdue them. james, who was standing in a separate location, finds it necessary to murder one of hwang's officers to escape. later, after james is given criticism from the mentor, he attacks the mentor's hide-out, murdering the mentor and his body-guards. he then acquires a fake thai passport and gets ready to leave south korea.
hwang and ha both feel sad at the death of their colleague. as a result, hwang announces his resignation while ha takes a leave of absence. however, while ha is doing her laundry, she suddenly remembers using her photographic memory that she has run into james in the past. namely, on the day of her police interview, james had fleetingly walked past her inside a subway car, carrying a grocery store brochure. ha runs to the grocery store and waits there, managing to catch sight of james again, and urgently notifies hwang and his officers while staying on james's tail. when james walks into a tunnel, hwang takes over the pursuit, but james recognizes hwang and stabs him. luckily, though, the wound isn't fatal. ha continues the pursuit into the subway tunnels but is also recognized by james and held hostage. when the swat team comes, james lets go of ha and runs deeper into the tunnels.
as the chase goes on, james finds himself trapped between the advancing swat team and the mouth of the tunnel, which is being guarded by hwang, who ran the long way around. as james decides to charge at hwang, the latter, finding himself at the juncture of an oncoming train, stands his ground to shoot at james, risking a 50/50 chance that the train will flatten him. fortunately, the train takes the other branch and james is hit by hwang's revolver and killed.
encouraged by the success, hwang withdraws his resignation, and together with ha, goes on to execute further such missions including the pursuit of international terrorists.


== cast ==


=== main ===
sol kyung-gu as chief detective hwang
jung woo-sung as james, leader of an international crime ring
han hyo-joo as rookie detective ha yoon-joo
jin kyeong as department head lee
lee junho as detective daramjwi ("squirrel")


=== supporting ===
kim byeong-ok as mysterious broker/cobbler
simon yam as target of surveillance team (cameo)
byun yo-han as m3
lee dong-hwi as parrot


== box office ==
cold eyes smashed 2.17 million in the first week of release. after 17 days, it reached 4 million admissions. it reached the 5 million mark on july 27, with 5,506,409 total admissions at the end of its run.


== awards and nominations ==
2013 buil film awardsbest actress - han hyo-joo
nominated - best supporting actress - jin kyung
nominated - best new actor - lee junho
nominated - best screenplay - cho ui-seok
nominated - best cinematography - kim byeong-seo2013 korean association of film critics awardsnominated - best actress - han hyo-joo2013 grand bell awardsnominated - best costume design - jo sang-gyeong2013 blue dragon film awardsbest actress - han hyo-joo
nominated - best supporting actor - jung woo-sung
nominated - best cinematography - kim byeong-seo, yeo kyung-bo
nominated - best lighting - kim seung-gyu
nominated - best music - dalparan, jang young-gyu
nominated - technical award - shin min-kyung2013 asia pacific film festivalnominated - best editing - shin min-kyung2014 asian film awardsbest editor - shin min-kyung
nominated - best actress - han hyo-joo
nominated - best supporting actor - jung woo-sung
nominated - best cinematography - kim byeong-seo, yeo kyung-bo2014 baeksang arts awardsbest supporting actress - jin kyung
nominated - best director - cho ui-seok, kim byeong-seo
nominated - best actor - jung woo-sung
nominated - most popular actor (film) - jung woo-sung
nominated - most popular actress (film) - han hyo-joo


== see also ==
list of films featuring surveillance


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
cold eyes at the korean movie database
cold eyes at imdb
cold eyes at hancinema