congo is a 1995 american science fiction action-adventure film loosely based on  michael crichton's 1980 novel of the same name. the picture was directed by frank marshall starring laura linney, dylan walsh, ernie hudson, grant heslov, joe don baker, and tim curry. the film was released on june 9, 1995, by paramount pictures.congo received negative reviews but performed better than expected at the box office.


== plot ==
while searching for rare blue diamonds that could lead to a new revolutionary communications laser, travicom employees charles travis and jeffrey weems discover the ruins of a lost city near a volcanic site in a remote part of the congo jungle. while following their progress at headquarters, charles's ex-fiance dr. karen ross and charles's father and travicom's ceo r.b. travis lose contact with the team and activate a remote camera, discovering the camp destroyed with numerous corpses. travis asks karen to lead another expedition to the site.
meanwhile, peter elliott, a primatologist at the university of california, berkeley, and his assistant richard teach human communication to primates using a mountain gorilla named amy. with a specialized backpack and glove, her sign language is translated to a digitized voice. despite the success, peter is concerned by amy's drawings of jungles and the eye of providence, and seeks funding to return amy to africa, but the university is reluctant. romanian philanthropist herkermer homolka offers to fund the expedition. having learned of the trip, karen asks peter to join his expedition since her visas are worthless without being connected to him. at first he is reluctant because no women are permitted on board the expedition plane, but when homolka's credit fails to fund the journey, she is allowed to join after paying for a spot on board and for fuel.
arriving in africa, they land in uganda neighboring zaire, where the group meets expert guide captain monroe kelly, but are arrested and interrogated by local military leader captain wanta, who finally grants them passage for a sizable bribe which the well-funded karen again provides. as the group crosses to tanzania to boards another plane, monroe reveals that homolka has led previous safaris in search of the "lost city of zinj", with disastrous results. the group parachutes into the jungle just before their plane, which is on auto-pilot, is shot down by zairean soldiers.
on the ground, they encounter a native tribe that leads them to bob driscoll, a wounded member of charles' expedition. on seeing amy approaching, bob begins screaming in fear and soon dies. the group continues by boat, and learn that homolka, in search of zinj and its fabled diamond mine, believes that amy's drawings suggest she has seen the mine and can lead them to it. after an attack by massive hippos, they find the ruined camp and the nearby city of zinj. richard and a couple of porters are killed by a vicious grey gorilla. monroe kelly and his friends take shelter at the ruined camp, keeping other gorillas at bay with high tech equipment.
when day breaks, they find homolka, several porters and amy missing. they return to the city, where they find homolka exploring, and surmise from hieroglyphs that the city's inhabitants specially bred the grey gorillas, encouraging their violent tendencies to guard the mine and kill anyone looking to steal the diamonds. the group suspects the gorillas turned on their masters yet still continue to protect the mine. they find the mine and are faced with a troop of grey gorillas. homolka begins to collect diamonds, but is soon cornered and killed by some of the apes. monroe, karen, and peter flee deeper into the mine, where they discover jeffrey and charles' bodies with charlie still holding a giant blue diamond in hand. as amy protects peter, monroe fends the other gorillas off while karen fits the diamond into a portable laser. the volcano begins to erupt, and the four escape as the city is flooded with lava, killing the gorillas.
once safe, karen reports to travis on finding the diamond and confirming charles' death. realizing travis was only interested in the diamond, she uses her laser to destroy the travicom satellite. in the nearby wreckage of another one of travis' expedition cargo plane they had found earlier, they find a hot-air balloon, and prepare to leave. peter sees amy with a troop of gorillas and bids her goodbye. the three take off in the balloon, and peter throws the diamond back into the jungle below. amy watches the departing balloon with a smile, then joins her new gorilla family.


== cast ==


== production ==
after the success of the first great train robbery, crichton decided to write a screenplay specifically for sean connery, as the character of charles munro, an archetypal "great white hunter" akin to h. rider haggard's hero, allan quatermain. the film was envisioned as an homage to classic pulp adventure tales, and crichton successfully pitched the movie to 20th century fox in 1979 without a fleshed out story. however, the film ran into problems when crichton learned that he could not use a real gorilla to portray the character of amy, which led to him leaving the project. from there, it was offered to several directors including steven spielberg and john carpenter who both declined. a brief attempt was made to revive the project in the late 1980s but to no avail. eventually, frank marshall directed the film with little, if any, involvement from  crichton. the film's teaser credits john patrick shanley and crichton as co-screenwriters, but the subsequent trailer and the film itself credit shanley alone.
originally, delroy lindo was set to shoot his scene in the dominican republic but ended up shooting it in pasadena, california.


== release ==


=== box office ===
in the united states, the film grossed $81,022,101. the final worldwide gross $152,022,101 worldwide versus a $50,000,000 budget.


=== critical reception ===

rotten tomatoes retroactively collected 49 reviews to give the film an approval rating of 22%. the site's consensus states: "mired in campy visual effects and charmless characters, congo is a suspenseless adventure that betrays little curiosity about the scientific concepts it purports to care about." metacritic rated it 22/100 based on 19 reviews, meaning "generally unfavorable reviews". roger ebert of chicago sun-times rated it 3 out of 4 stars. he called the film a splendid example of a genre no longer much in fashion, the jungle adventure story. it was also nominated for seven golden raspberry awards. hal hinson of the washington post called the film a "spielberg knockoff...shamelessly lifting themes and ideas from a handful of steven's greatest hits." hinson also criticized amy the gorilla as "the most disappointing 'performance' of all" and opined that the supporting actors, tim curry and ernie hudson, stood out more than the lead actors. 
the a.v. club's ignatiy vishnevetsky said congo was full of "goofy pleasures" like "delectably goofy" lasers and "mutant killer apes", calling it one of the most "enjoyable" films that came out of the post-jurassic park period. he wen't on to say that he enjoyed the film more as a campy comedy than as the thriller the trailers made it out to be and concluded the write-up by asking "is congo a good film? its certainly a good time."


=== accolades ===


== games ==
a video game based on the film, congo the movie: the lost city of zinj, was released in 1996. a different game for the super nintendo entertainment system and sega genesis was in development, but was cancelled. another adventure game was released for pc and macintosh called congo the movie: descent into zinj.
a pinball machine named congo was produced that was based on the film.


== references ==


== external links ==
congo at imdb
congo at allmovie
congo at rotten tomatoes
congo at box office mojo