cookie is a 1989 american comedy film directed by susan seidelman starring peter falk, emily lloyd and dianne wiest.


== plot ==
cookie voltecki (emily lloyd) jumps the turnstiles with her friend and is caught by transit security who fine her and bring her to court. there she is defended from her charges by a lawyer she doesn't know and put in a car where she is taken to her estranged father, dino capisco (peter falk), who is about to finish a thirteen-year prison sentence. to straighten cookie out he sends her to work with an old associate of his named carmine (michael v. gazzo).
dino is successfully paroled and goes home with his wife bunny, but shortly after goes to visit cookie's mother lenore voltecki (dianne wiest), dino's longtime mistress. cookie is disgusted with the way the married dino treats her mother and dino grows frustrated with cookie, but at lenore's urging the two go to a christmas party at carmine's. while there cookie and dino fight and leave early. aware that he is being followed by the feds, who want to put him back in prison, dino has cookie shake their security detail. when pictures of them end up in newspapers dino tells his wife that cookie is his driver and begins using her as such.dino reveals to cookie he is actually mad with carmine, who sold out his shares in a business they had together when dino was in prison and now refuses to give him the money from the sale. to get revenge dino calls the union on carmine's sweatshop and also has some of his men ransack trucks containing carmine's merchandise. in retaliation some of carmine's men shoot at dino's car while cookie is driving it and later plant a bomb in dino's car, though no one is harmed.
a worried cookie reaches out to the fbi, offering to give up her father's associates as long as he is put in witness protection. dino vetoes the idea since he thinks carmine's men will never stop hunting him down, but cookie suggests they fake his death so that carmine won't bother looking for him.dino and cookie hatch a plot where they leak out that dino has millions and is planning to retire to italy. carmine decides to steal the money and then kill dino but the plan goes awry when the money is stolen. carmine then goes to confront dino and is blown up in his car. the district attorney is horrified that he accidentally killed carmine but cookie tells him he still needs to honor his agreement to put dino in witness protection lest she divulge that he murdered someone.
dino and lenore leave to go to witness protection and cookie hugs her father and takes a picture of the three of them as a family.
cookie attends dino's funeral while elsewhere dino and lenore marry and get ready to spend their lives together with their new identities.


== cast ==
peter falk as dominick "dino" capisco
dianne wiest as lenore voltecki
emily lloyd as carmela "cookie" voltecki
michael v. gazzo as carmine
brenda vaccaro as bunny capisco
adrian pasdar as vito
lionel stander as enzo della testa
jerry lewis as arnold ross
bob gunton as richie segretto
joe mantello as dominick
ricki lake as pia
joy behar as dottie


== reception ==
the film received negative reviews from critics upon its release and has a 15% rating on rotten tomatoes from 13 reviews.the film was said by roger ebert to be funny and pleasant in some sense, but he felt it "[wasn't] very memorable probably because the filmmakers didn't have a clear vision of it themselves.".


== music ==
i should be so lucky, performed by australian actress/singer kylie minogue, is played over the end credits. slammer is the opening theme and is by thomas newman.


== home media ==
warner archives released the film on made-to-order dvd in the united states on may 4, 2010.


== references ==


== external links ==
cookie at imdb
cookie at rotten tomatoes
cookie at box office mojo