coolie no. 1 is a 1995 indian hindi-language comedy drama film, directed by david dhawan, and written by rumi jaffery and kader khan. the film stars govinda, karisma kapoor, shakti kapoor, kader khan, harish kumar, sadashiv amrapurkar and mahesh anand, with music by anand-milind. this movie was one of the first successful movies of karisma kapoor. actor govinda received the star screen award special jury award for his role in this movie as 'performer of the decade'. over the years, the movie has become a classic in hindi film history and is now considered a cult film. the film is a remake of the 1993 tamil film chinna mapillai. in 2020, david dhawan has remade the same film with the same name with his son varun dhawan, sara ali khan and paresh rawal.


== plot ==
shaadiram gharjode (sadashiv amrapurkar), a matchmaker, is once humiliated by hoshiyar chand choudhry (kader khan) when shaadiram goes to inform him about a family wanting to marry their son to hoshiyar's daughter.  hoshiyar chand insults them as he wants both his daughters to marry into the richest family. shaadiram decides to teach hoshiyar chand a lesson. he meets raju coolie (govinda), a bus stop porter who wants to get married. they go to hoshiyar chand's village pretending to be a rich family. raju is dressed as kunwar mahendra pratap mehta, shaadiram is dressed as his secretary and raju's best friend, deepak mechanic (harish kumar) is dressed as his driver. hoshiyar chand is impressed and he wants his daughter malti choudhry (karisma kapoor) to marry raju, leading to humorous situations.


== cast ==
govinda as raju coolie & kunwar mahendra pratap singh mehta
karisma kapoor as malti choudhry
harish kumar as deepak mechanic
kanchan  as shalini choudhry, malti's sister
kader khan as choudhry hoshiyar chand shikaarpuri, shalini & malti's father
shakti kapoor as goverdhan, shalini & malti's mama
sadashiv amrapurkar as pandit shadiram gharjode & mahendra's secretary
kulbhushan kharbanda as gajendra pratap singh mehta, mahesh's father (special appearance)
javed khan amrohi as a taxi driver
dinesh hingoo as a game show host (special appearance)
mahesh anand as mahesh mehta, gajendra's son
vikas anand as shaadiram's client
tiku talsania as inspector pandey
shammi as mrs. choudhry, hoshiyar chand's mother
babbanlal yadav as a street magician
mahavir shah as shukla, gajendra's manager


== music ==
the music of coolie no. 1 was popular when it released. although producer of tips films vashu bhagnani and director david dhawan were extremely confident that "husn hain suhana", rendered by abhijeet and chandana dixit would be the selling factor of the album, it was the song "main to raste se ja raha tha" that did the trick. the music of coolie no. 1 strengthened anand-milind and govinda/david dhawan's track record of coming up with super hit music with each outing.
the film's soundtrack album sold around 3.5 million units, making it one of the best-selling bollywood soundtracks of the year.


=== track listing ===


== remake ==

on 8 march 2019, it was announced that the film will be remade, with david dhawan as director again and with his son varun dhawan and sara ali khan essaying the roles of raju and malti originally played by govinda (actor) and karisma kapoor. the first look poster of the remade coolie no.1 was released on 1 may 2019. the film released on 25 december 2020 through amazon prime video to negative reviews.


== references ==


== external links ==
coolie no. 1 at imdb
coolie no - 1 on bollywood hungama