copycat is a 1995 american psychological thriller directed by jon amiel and starring sigourney weaver, holly hunter and dermot mulroney. the score was composed by christopher young.


== plot ==
after giving a guest lecture on criminal psychology at a local university, dr. helen hudson, a respected field expert on serial killers, is cornered in the restroom of the lecture hall by one of her previous subjects, daryll lee cullum, who kills a police officer and brutally attacks her. helen becomes severely agoraphobic as a result, sealing herself inside an expensive hi-tech apartment, conducting her entire life from behind a computer screen and assisted by a friend, andy.
when a new series of murders spreads fear and panic across her home city of san francisco, inspector m.j. monahan and her partner reuben goetz solicit helen's expertise. initially reluctant, helen soon finds herself drawn into the warped perpetrator's game of wits. as the murders continue, helen realizes that the elusive assailant draws inspiration from notorious serial killers, including albert desalvo, the hillside strangler, david berkowitz, jeffrey dahmer, and ted bundy. when the murderer begins contacting and even stalking helen, she and m.j. realize that he is after them, and they enlist the aid of cullum, who tells them what he knows about the killer.
helen soon realizes that the copycat killer has been following the list of serial killers in the same order as she had presented them in her lecture at the university on the night of her attack, and the two work to figure out where and when he will strike next. reuben is held hostage and killed in an unrelated shooting incident at the police station, leaving m.j.  now questioning herself after her targeting of the shooters brachial nerve failed when he got up and shot reuben in the back  to continue the search for the serial killer alone.
after andy is killed in a manner reminiscent of jeffrey dahmer, m.j. deduces the killer to be peter foley. after leading a failed attempt to catch foley at his house, m.j. reaches the house of helen, m.j. discovers that he has kidnapped her and left a video to m.j. and asked him to guess where he has taken  helen. m.j. guesses and heads back to the scene of daryll lee's attempt at killing her  the restroom of the lecture hall. once she gets there, m.j. finds helen bound, hanged and gagged in the same manner that cullum did before, but she is ambushed and shot by foley, rendering her unconscious. as foley prepares to kill m.j., helen desperately attempts to save her by ruining foley's carefully replicated crime scene the only way she can  by attempting to hang herself. foley panics and cuts helen down, and helen is able to get away and escape to the building's roof. her agoraphobia kicks in again, and helen finds herself cornered. accepting her fate, she turns to face foley. however, just as he is about to kill her, m.j. shoots him in the brachial nerve, giving him one last chance to surrender. when he pulls his gun back on her, however, she shoots him until she kills him with a headshot.
some time later, daryll lee writes a letter to another serial killer, instructing him on how to kill helen, and revealing that he had been aiding foley all along. daryll wishes "happy huntin', partner" to his new proxy in the mission of killing helen.


== cast ==
sigourney weaver as dr. helen hudson
holly hunter as inspector mary jane "m.j." monahan
dermot mulroney as inspector reuben goetz
harry connick jr. as daryll lee cullum
william mcnamara as peter foley
john morris as young peter foley (scenes cut)
j.e. freeman as lieutenant thomas quinn
will patton as inspector nicoletti
john rothman as andy
shannon o'hurley as susan schiffer
bob greene as pachulski
tony haney as kerby
danny kovacs as kostas
tahmus rounds as landis
david michael silverman as mike
diane amos as "gigi"
richard conti as harvey
nick scoggin as conrad
bert kinyon as burt
kenny kwong as chinese kid
rebecca klinger as peter's wife
kathleen stefano as peter's mother
hansford prince as fred
keith phillips as felix mendoza
ron kaell as mac
kelvin han yee as chinese inspector
james cunningham as hal
russ christoff as commissioner petrillo
jeni chua as michelle
thomas j. fieweger as officer bodger
floyd gale holland as l. bottemy
stuart w. yee as thug


== soundtrack ==
all tracks composed by christopher young, unless otherwise noted.

"get up to this by new world beat
"carabu party by steven ray
"techno boy by silkski (jerome evans)
"main title from copycat"
"stick him or shoot him"
"housebound"
"silent screams"
"murder's an art"
"in darkness"
"take a life"
"next to the devil"
"pastoral horror"
"silhouette"
"gallows"
"butchers and bakers"
"panic"
"who's afraid"
"lay me down"
"the barber of seville: largo al factotum" by roberto servile/failoni chamber orchestra/will humburg
"tosca: vissi d'arte" by gabriela beakov/the czech philharmonic orchestra/bohumil gregor
"requiem (faur): in paradisum, requiem op. 48" (choral work)


== reception ==
the film received positive reviews from critics. it holds an approval rating of 79% on rotten tomatoes, based on 38 reviews, with an average rating of 6.80/10. audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "a-" on an a+ to f scale.roger ebert of the chicago sun-times awarded it three and a half stars out of four, and a "thumbs up" on siskel & ebert, citing holly hunter's character as "one of the most intriguing and three-dimensional characters of the year".the film is recognized by american film institute in these lists:

2001: afi's 100 years...100 thrills  nominated


== see also ==
copycat crime


== references ==


== external links ==
copycat at imdb
copycat at rotten tomatoes
trailer the new york times