creature 3d is a 2014 indian 3d monster-horror film directed by vikram bhatt. the film stars bipasha basu and imran abbas in lead roles. it is produced by bhushan kumar and krishan kumar and co-produced by ajay kapoor under the banner of t-series in association with bvg films. the film is the bollywood debut of pakistani model turned actor imran abbas naqvi. the film also stars amit tandon and mukul dev in supporting roles. the film received negative reviews from the critics upon releasing.


== plot ==
ahana opens a hotel in glendale, himachal pradesh. she requires manpowers, furniture s and various other items for her hotel. in the opening scene it was revealed she was talking to a driver to transport the items quickly. the driver was struck in mid forest as his truck was damaged. during the conversation the driver hears some strange voices coming from forest sidelines. upon investigating he sees something much horrified and he locked himself at the back on truck. the creature attacked and vandalized the truck and then kill the driver in most brutal manner. on the day of the opening party, she meets kunal anand, a novelist, and they become attracted to each other. on one day a chef of ahana's hotel is killed by that beast. a newly married couple staying in ahana's hotel go for a picnic in the forest and both them are killed by  a force which is not human. soon same incidents follow and people die. people suspect it to be an animal and then they catch a leopard which they think is one who killed people. ahana is happy but she doesn't know that it was not the cheetah that killed people but another strong force. on one particular night the beast enter in ahana's hotel and then it was revealed that it is actually a brahmrakshas who are entities cursed by lord brahma. upon seeing brahmrakshas the people inside the hotel panicked and ran away but the beast managed to kill or injured several peoples. just when it was about to kill ahana kunal manage to save her but the beast was too quick to get hold of them both and just when it was about to make its final move, the professor enter the scene and it scare away brahmrakshas with fire. from there we came to know the weakness of brahmrakshas. because of the brahmrakshas havoc, ahana's hotel lost its image
there are less customers at ahana's hotel and she is on the verge of getting bankrupt which will result in the bank (the one from which she took a loan) seizing her hotel.  they meet a professor who tells them that there resides a brahmarakshas, a man-eating mutant which is the result of brahma, the hindu god of creation, cursing demons to become such creatures with no salvation, eternally condemned to roam on earth and suffer. brahmarakshasas still lurk in dense forests of india, but their sightings are as relevant as sightings of ufos. he suggests ahana and kunal to leave if they wish to stay alive. ahana refuses to leave the hotel, determined to fight back.
ahana, kunal and the professor are joined in the fight by two cops, inspector rana and inspector chaubey, but the brahmarakshasa kills chaubey. they learn that a sarpanch filed a report of a brahmarakshasa sighting a few years back and go to meet him. he tells them that decades ago, a hunter killed a brahmarakshasa, and the only person who can help them now is dr. moga, the son of the late hunter. kunal and ahana set for shimla to meet the doctor. on the way, kunal reveals his true identity as karan malhotra, the chairman of the builder group that compelled ahana's father to commit suicide. he tells her that he felt guilty and wanted to apologize. heartbroken, ahana breaks up with karan.
dr. moga explains that brahmarakshasa can be killed by a weapon dipped in the temple pond of the brahma temple in pushkar but is effective only if dipped into the pond on night of kartik purnima. since kartik purnima is many days away, dr. moga gives ahana an old rifle with which his father had killed a brahmarakshasa. dr. moga tells ahana that his father and his friends dipped 30 bullets in the pond on the night of kartik purnima, but they used up 23 bullets and still all the friends of his father died and only his father was left. he then hands over the left 7 bullets to ahana. ahana, the professor, and rana enter the den of the brahmarakshasa; rana and the professor are killed by the beast, and when it tries to attack ahana, karan saves her. with karan's help, ahana manages to kill the creature with the last bullet in the rifle.
a few days later, the hotel is ready to be reopened. ahana forgives karan and they rekindle their relationship.


== cast ==
bipasha basu as ahana dutt
imran abbas as kunal anand/karan malhotra
mukul dev as professor sadana
deepraj rana as inspector rana
mohan kapoor as doctor moga
shirish sharma as father of ahana
amit tandon as arjun (honeymoon couple husband)
aparna bajpai as shruti (honeymoon couple wife)
natasha rana as psychiatrist
milind phatak as gun specialist / hunter,and a friend of karan
bikramjeet kanwarpal as inspector chaubey
vikram bhatt as voice of brahmarakshas (creature).
rajshri rani pandey as guest appearance
alexander (sasha) dolbenko as a foreign hotel visiter


== music ==
the soundtrack and the lyrics of the film were written by mithoon, except for "sawan aaya hai" which has music and lyrics by tony kakkar. the film's soundtrack officially released on 31 july 2014. koimoi stated that the soundtrack had received a good reception.
all music is composed by mithoon, tony kakkar.


== reception ==
the trailer of the movie was released in july 2014. koimoi called it "a half baked trailer that relies solely on 3d".vinayak chakravorty of india today has given 2 stars to the movie stating that it suffered from budget constraints, "serves little intrigue and banks on the sporadic jolts courtesy loud music." anupama chopra said, "this is the type of film in which the human beings are so annoying that you are actually rooting for the creature that kills them. in fact, the creature had more personality than all of them put together. in an effective opening sequence, vikram introduces him to us by only showing us isolated parts; his talons, monstrous eyes, powerful tail. i think this creature should have demanded a better script."


== box-office ==
india today reports that the film had a budget of rs.180 million with an additional rs.70 million spent on a marketing campaign.koimoi reported the film opened on 1400 screens, with an average occupancy. the film returned the financials but did not make a big impact making it just a hit.


== references ==


== external links ==
creature 3d at imdb