cromwell is a 1970 british historical drama film written and directed by ken hughes. it is based on the life of oliver cromwell, who rose to lead the parliamentary forces during the later parts of the english civil war and, as lord protector, ruled great britain and ireland in the 1650s. it features an ensemble cast, led by richard harris as cromwell and alec guinness as king charles i, with robert morley as edward montagu, 2nd earl of manchester and timothy dalton as prince rupert of the rhine.
the film received two oscar nominations during the 43rd academy awards held in 1971, winning one for best costume design by vittorio nino novarese, but losing another for best original score, composed by frank cordell. it was also nominated for a bafta award for best costume design and a golden globe award for best original score. at the 7th moscow international film festival in 1971 it won the award for best actor (richard harris), and was nominated for the golden prize as best picture (ken hughes). the film received negative reviews for its many historical inaccuracies; however, much praise went to the acting (particularly harris and guinness), the score, and the costume design.


== plot ==
oliver cromwell is a devout puritan, a country squire, magistrate and former member of parliament. king charles i's policies, including the enclosing of common land for the use of wealthy landowners and the introduction of "popish" and "romish" rituals into the church of england have become increasingly grating to many, including cromwell. in fact, charles regards himself as a devout anglican, permitting his french queen to practice roman catholicism in private but forbidding her to bring up the young prince of wales in that faith. cromwell plans to take his family to the new world, but, on the eve of their departure, he is persuaded by his friends to stay and resume a role in politics.
charles has unenthusiastically summoned parliament for the first time in twelve years, as he needs money to fight wars against both the scots and the irish. although to appease the commons he reluctantly agrees to execute his hated adviser the earl of strafford, the parliament of england will still not grant him his requests unless he agrees to reforms that could lead to a constitutional monarchy. committed to the divine right of kings, and under pressure from his queen to stand firm, charles refuses. when he attempts to arrest five members of parliament (in reality cromwell was not one of them), war breaks out in england itself, parliament against the king, both sides convinced that god is on their side.
when the parliamentary forces in which cromwell is a cavalry officer proved ineffective, he, along with sir thomas fairfax, sets up the new model army and soon turns the tide against the king. the army's discipline, training, and numbers secure victory and cromwell's cavalry proves to be the deciding factor, though his son is killed in battle. with his army defeated, charles goes so far as to call on help from catholic nations, which disgusts his protestant supporters. he is finally defeated but, a brave man in his own way, he still refuses to give in to the demands of cromwell and his associates for a system of government in which parliament will have as much say in the running of the country as the king.
cromwell later hears from sir edward hyde, the king's once-loyal adviser, that charles has secretly been raising a catholic army to resume the war against parliament. he and his supporters thus have charles put on trial for treason. charles, found guilty and sentenced to death, faces execution bravely and even his most ardent critics are moved by his dignity and the fact that he has forgiven his captors. there is little celebration or satisfaction over his death, even on cromwell's part.
parliament soon proves itself just as useless in governing the country and, like the late king, cromwell is forced to undertake a coup d'etat. but where charles failed, cromwell succeeds: his troops remove the mps from the house of commons, leaving cromwell sitting symbolically alone in the chamber as virtual dictator where he outlines to the viewer his vision for the protectorate. the film ends with a voice-over stating that cromwell served very successfully for five years as lord protector before charles i's son, charles ii, returned as king of an england "never to be the same again".


== cast ==
richard harris as oliver cromwell: a cavalry officer, general of the new model army and lord protector
alec guinness as king charles i
robert morley as the earl of manchester: a commander of the parliamentary forces.
dorothy tutin as queen henrietta maria: french catholic wife of charles i and mother of prince charles.
frank finlay as john carter
timothy dalton as prince rupert of the rhine: nephew of charles i and a cavalier cavalry commander. dalton, 24 years old at the time, was offered the role by casting director maude spector, known for her work in lawrence of arabia.
patrick wymark as the earl of strafford: a leading advisor to charles i when he comes back to england.
patrick magee as hugh peters: a preacher.
nigel stock as sir edward hyde: the once loyal advisor to charles i. a sympathetic yet conflicted man, he ultimately turns against the king when the latter pretends to accept the peace terms but actually plans to resume the war against parliament.
charles gray as the earl of essex: lord general of the new model army.
michael jayston as henry ireton: a well meaning yet manipulative parliamentarian. he pushes cromwell into actions, which the latter initially doubts but pursues them eventually. ireton's marriage to cromwell's eldest daughter, bridget is not mentioned in the film.
douglas wilmer as sir thomas fairfax: a fair minded commander who joins cromwell and the parliamentarians in their cause but has some respect for the king.
geoffrey keen as john pym: the leader of the long parliament.
stratford johns as president bradshaw: the judge and president of the court during the king's trial.
ian mcculloch as john hampden: a leading parliamentarian and one of the five members whom the king attempted to arrest.
patrick o'connell as john lilburne: an english political leveller.
anna cropper as ruth carter: john carter's wife.
jack gwillim as general byron: a royalist supporter
anthony may as richard cromwell: son of oliver cromwell, who would succeed him as lord protector.
richard cornish as oliver cromwell ii: son of oliver cromwell.
stacy dorning as mary cromwell: daughter of oliver cromwell.
zena walker as elizabeth cromwell: wife of oliver cromwell and the matriarch of the cromwell family.
robin stewart as prince charles: the son and successor of charles i and future king of england - when he returns from exile.the final version of cromwell at one stage was 180 minutes long, but it was cut down to 141 minutes, deleting a number of featured roles in the process including felix aylmer (in his final film) as an archbishop, and bryan pringle. tony caunter, george a. cooper and peter bennett, three prominent english actors, were also cut out of the film following production.


== production ==
in 1960, hughes read john buchan's biography, oliver cromwell and more books before touring england and researching from historic sites to museums and archives.  in september 1960, warwick purchased the screen rights to buchan's book and hughes was announced as writer and director. during the next few years, it was reported peter finch and tony hancock were under consideration for the title role before richard harris was finally cast in 1968.hughes originally wrote the script in 1961. richard harris liked it and wanted to star but financiers did not consider him a big enough star at the time to finance the film. they wanted charlton heston but hughes did not think he was appropriate. (heston wrote in his diaries on 2 november 1961 that he turned down "warwick's cromwell script.")
hughes tried to get richard burton to read the script but burton was not interested. in april 1967, irwin allen announced that john briley had rewritten ken hughes' script and that peter hall was going to direct. allen hoped to get paul scofield to play charles i and albert finney to play cromwell. columbia were going to finance with filming to take place the following year. (hughes was making chitty chitty bang bang around this time.)hughes later said he almost succeeded in making the film in 1968 but finance fell through at the last minute. in 1969, london's parliament square was constructed at shepperton studios.in february 1969, it was announced hughes would write and direct for irving allen.in april 1969, it was reported ronald harwood was working on the script with ken hughes. (and that hughes and harwood would then make a film a about leon trotsky for joseph sahftel.) hughes eventually succeeded in raising the money from columbia in the us. after $600,000 had been spent they were tempted to pull out but changed their mind. the budget started at $6 million and blew out to $9 million.most of the film was shot in england but the battle scenes were shot in spain.the original cut went for three hours fifteen minutes but hughes cut it down to two hours twenty four minutes."i think it's the best thing i've ever done," said hughes in 1970.


== historical points ==
although publicity for the film boasted that it had been made "after ten years of research", the film has been criticised for its historical inaccuracies. in its defence, george macdonald fraser has written, "inevitably there are historical queries all the way through, as there are bound to be in a picture which takes its subject seriously and tries to cover so much in less than two and a half hours. the main thrust of cromwell is true, it gets a great deal of history, and the sense of history, right". costumes, locations (e.g. the layout of the house of commons) and the appearance of actors were generally accurate but as in many historical films  as much as for practical film making purposes as anything else  liberties were taken with the course of events.


== reception ==


=== critical ===
the film received generally unfavourable  reception, with criticism to the historical inaccuracies, however praise was given  for the performances of its two leads, production values and score.filmink said the film "does have some good things about it: alec guinness is superb as charles i, and the production design is amazing. but its dull. so dull. every time richard harris walks on screen he looks as though hes about to give a speech and he does."


=== box-office ===
the film was one of the most popular movies in 1970 at the british box-office.


=== awards and nominations ===
1971 academy awards: academy award for best costume design (vittorio nino novarese)
nominated: best original score (frank cordell).
british academy of film and television award (bafta): nominated in costume design
golden globe nomination for best original score (frank cordell)
1971 7th moscow international film festival, award for best actor (richard harris)
nominated: golden prize as best picture (ken hughes).


== see also ==
list of american films of 1970


== references ==


== external links ==
cromwell at imdb
cromwell at the tcm movie database
cromwell at allmovie