far cry vengeance is a 2006 first-person shooter game developed by ubisoft montreal and published by ubisoft for the wii. vengeance is a remake of far cry instincts: evolution, the previous xbox title, and features three new levels, new weapons, vehicles, and controls.
the game received largely negative reviews upon release with criticism for the graphics, overly compressed fmvs, and poor enemy ai, though the controls were praised.


== gameplay ==
the game takes full advantage of the wii remote and its nunchuk attachment. for example, the player can make the character jump by lifting the nunchuk. weapons are aimed by pointing the wii remote at the screen, and melee attacks are carried out by making a slashing motion with it. the zoom on sniper rifles will similarly be controlled by moving the wii remote towards the television. split screen chaos mode (standard deathmatch) is included. the popular map maker mode, as well as online play, are absent from the wii version of the game, and no wiiconnect24 features are utilized.
the wii version also includes exclusive content, such as a new storyline, three new maps, including "tourist resort, an abandoned world war ii base and a petrol refinery", as well as new weapons that include, among others, the bull .44 large-caliber revolver, the ak-47, and a shotgun.


== plot ==
the game begins with carver, the protagonist, in a bar, when a woman named kade asks him to meet her later. he agrees, but is arrested before he can meet her. while in prison, he learns that kade is working with a group of rebels. he soon escapes while a man with supernatural speed named semeru attacks the police station. carver eventually meets kade on the beach.
she takes him to an island where the rebels asked kade to perform a gun run. in the middle of this mission, the rebels turn on her and carver. they escape from the rebels, and much of the time after that is spent attacking the rebels.
later, kade is captured by semeru, who plans to take her back to the rebel base. carver tries to stop him, but is stopped by a large number of rebels. he flees through the forest, and meets a man named kien do, who asks for carver's help against the rebels. he agrees.
after several battles with the rebels, kien do is captured by rebel forces. carver pursues them to the main rebel base, where he finds kien do at the foot of the mountain the base sits on, dead and bloodied. carver climbs the mountain, battling rebel soldiers along the way. when he reaches the base, he finds semeru and kade, who carver finds out is working with semeru. carver manages to defeat semeru, and then kade.


== development ==
the game was scheduled to have been unveiled on september 14, 2006 during a nintendo press conference, but was absent from the event. first details were instead revealed by the vgm daily podcast episode 118 on september 5, 2006 it uses a ported version of the cryengine used in the original farcry game.


== reception ==

far cry vengeance received "generally unfavorable" reviews, according to review aggregator metacritic.ign gave the game a 4/10, though it did give its gameplay ranking a 7 and commented that, gameplay-wise, it was "a fundamentally fun shooter and most of the new wii controls feel great, despite not even looking half as good as the year-old xbox version."


== references ==


== external links ==
official far cry website
far cry vengeance at mobygames