daag: a poem of love (transl.) is a 1973 indian hindi-language romantic drama film produced and directed by yash chopra in his debut as a producer, which laid the foundation of yash raj films. it is an adaptation of the 1886 thomas hardy novel the mayor of casterbridge.
the film stars rajesh khanna, sharmila tagore, raakhee, madan puri, kader khan, prem chopra and a.k. hangal.the film was made at the peak of the rajesh khanna's craze and became a super hit at the box office and received praise for the  performances of the three leads. the music by laxmikant pyarelal dominated the charts for the year. the film was later remade into the telugu film vichitra jeevitham (1978). this film was kader khan's debut as an actor.yash chopra used raakhee's character name 'chandni' from this film also in his later films silsila (1981) and chandni (1989).


== plot ==
a young man, sunil kohli (rajesh khanna), falls for beautiful sonia (sharmila tagore). soon, they get married and leave for their honeymoon. on the way, owing to bad weather, they decide to spend a night at a bungalow owned by sunil's  boss. the boss's son, dheeraj kapoor (prem chopra), tries to rape sonia when she is alone. but sunil arrives in time, and a fight ensues, resulting in the death of dheeraj. sunil is arrested and, later, sentenced to life imprisonment by the court. but, on the way to prison, the police van carrying him meets with an accident. all occupants are killed. years later, sonia, working as a school teacher and bringing up sunil's and her son, finds out that her husband is still alive. he is living with a new identity as sudhir, and is married to a rich woman named chandni           (raakhee). after escaping from the police van, sunil met chandni, whose lover had ditched her on learning of her pregnancy. sunil married her to provide legitimacy to her child, in return for her help in establishing his new identity. now, after so many years, the law is once again at his doorstep. this time, however, there is an added crime to his name: bigamy.


== cast ==
rajesh khanna - sunil kohli
sharmila tagore - sonia kohli
raakhee - chandni
prem chopra - dheeraj kapoor
baby pinky - pinky
raju shrestha (master raju) - rinku
manmohan krishna - deewan, chandni's father
madan puri - k. c. khanna
achala sachdev - mrs. malti khanna
iftekhar - inspector singh
hari shivdasani - jagdish kapoor
yashodra katju - school principal
kader khan - prosecuting attorney
a. k. hangal - prosecuting attorney / judge
s. n. banerjee - judge
karan dewan - doctor kapoor who treats chandani's father
surendra nath - sunil's uncle
jagdish raj - ram singh (driver)
manmohan - prisoner in van fighting with sunil
padma khanna - dancer
aruna - dancer
habib - blacksmith removing sunil's handcuffs
saul george - jr.artist


== crew ==
director - yash chopra
story - gulshan nanda
dialogue - akhtar-ul-iman
producer - yash chopra
editor - pran mehra
art director - r. g. gaekwad
cinematographer - kay gee
stunts - ravi khanna, m. b. shetty
choreographer - suresh bhatt
lyricist - sahir ludhianvi
music director - laxmikant pyarelal
playback singers - kishore kumar, lata mangeshkar, rajesh khanna


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack includes the following tracks, composed by laxmikant pyarelal, and with lyrics by sahir ludhianvi 
the song "ab chahe ma roothe yaa baba" was listed at #7 on binaca geetmala annual list 1973
the song "mere dil mein aaj kya hai" was listed at #20 on binaca geetmala annual list 1973


== awards and nominations ==
21st filmfare awards
wins

best director - yash chopra
best supporting actress - raakheenominations

best film - yash chopra
best actor - rajesh khanna
best actress - sharmila tagore
best music - laxmikant pyarelal
best male singer - kishore kumar - "mere dil mein aaj kya hai"


== references ==


== external links ==
daag: a poem of love at imdb
daag (1973) at yash raj films