darr @ the mall (transl.fear @ the mall) is an indian horror film directed by pawan kripalani of ragini mms fame. the film was released on 21 february 2014 and stars jimmy sheirgill and nushrat bharucha in the lead roles. the film is produced by multi screen media and contiloe entertainment.


== plot ==
a new mall called amity mall has opened up, owned by mr manchanda (arif zakaria) and mr khan (asif basra) who claim it to be asia's largest mall. 
the film starts off with a security guard talking to someone on phone but displays being paranoid. he looks towards a smokey apparation and begs it to let him go, but a chase ensues and he rapidly gets into his car, trying to escape but while going through the ramps of the basement, the car crashes and the man is eventually killed by an unknown force who strangled him using the seat belt.
a week later, vishnu (jimmy shergill) goes to the mall to apply for the position of head of security. mr khan interviews him but is interrupted by tischa, the marketing director who says there's something important he must attend to. mr khan joins the others(mr manchanda, mr saini and tischa) in a meeting room where the tv shows a news reporter covering up on the death of the security guard. the mall is reputed as being haunted because of various deaths of construction workers and mall staff and hence people refrain from working there, but mr khan hires vishnu after he agrees to work there despite the claims. vishnu quickly changes into his uniform in the locker room where the locker of the previous guard(who was killed) mysteriously opens, where a file falls down. on examining it, vishnu finds photographs of camera footage from various areas of the mall all with the smokey apparation caught on camera.
he catches someone spying on him and on confronting, it turns out to be a small girl whom he questions about her parents, but while he is distracted, the girl disappears. vishnu seems perplexed but soon brushes it off and continues to the surveillance room along with his assistant, rana. he does a quick search of the room and finds a some spilled jam which comes of as rather suspicious to him. 
he then sends rana to check all cameras to make sure they're working but while in the basement, the storage room door opens by itself and on being ordered by vishnu, rana checks it out, but is shortly killed by an unknown apparation. 
vishnu gets some radio static on his walkie talkie a few times which forces him to go to the storage room to check on rana. on checking the room, he doesn't find rana but we're shown few body parts belonging to him stored on the shelf, proving that he was dismembered.


== cast ==
jimmy sheirgill as vishnu sharma/arjun
nushrat bharucha as ahana manchanda
arif zakaria as alok manchanda
asif basra as javed khan
nivedita bhattacharya as tisha
vikram raj bhardwaj as kd
shraddha kaul as mother madeline
neeraj khetrapal as sahni
yaushika varma as mandy
anadya sharma as the little girl
geet sharma as nanau
pramod pathak as rana
neeraj sood as rajendra solanki, mall security guard
charlotte desmond
rahul mishra
vishal jethwa
danish akhtar
amit roy


== promotion ==
darr @ the mall has done over 8 television show integrations. the movie is promoted at a sony tv shows adaalat, bhoot aaya, cid, fear files: darr ki sacchi tasvirein on zee tv, taarak mehta ka ooltah chashmah on sab tv, chidiya ghar on sab tv, f.i.r. on sab tv. the official music launch was on boogie woogie kids championship the episode of which aired on 18 january 2014


== music ==
the soundtrack of the film is given by shankarehsaanloy, while the lyrics are written by amitabh bhattacharya. the album includes three original tracks, one remix track and one instrumental track.


=== track listing ===
all lyrics are written by amitabh bhattacharya; all music is composed by shankarehsaanloy.


== critical reception ==
dna india said that the mall is a spine chilling tale of one night and an encounter with the past.


== references ==


== external links ==
darr @ the mall at imdb 
darr @ the mall at bollywood hungama