dead ringer (also known as who is buried in my grave?) is a 1964 american horror film made by warner bros. it was directed by paul henreid from a screenplay by oscar millard and albert beich from the story la otra by rian james, previously filmed in a mexican version starring dolores del ro. the music score was by andr previn and the cinematography by ernest haller. the film stars bette davis, karl malden and peter lawford with philip carey, jean hagen, george macready, estelle winwood, george chandler and cyril delevanti.
the film marks the second time davis played twin sisters, the first being in the 1946 film a stolen life. for this reason, dead ringer is sometimes mistakenly listed as a remake of a stolen life.


== plot ==
at the funeral of her husband frank, wealthy widow margaret delorca (bette davis), meets up with her identical twin sister, dowdy and downbeat edith phillips (also played by davis), from whom she has been estranged for 18 years. the two return to delorca's opulent mansion, where they argue about their falling out over margaret's marriage to delorca, who originally courted edith but had an affair with margaret. margaret had forced frank to marry her by telling him she was pregnant with his child. however, edith finds out from margaret's chauffeur (george chandler) that the couple were childless, and becomes resentful, realizing how margaret had trapped frank into marriage. while margaret now enjoys a life of ease and wealth, edith is struggling financially; her business, a cocktail lounge, is losing money and she is threatened with eviction for not paying her bills.
later the same day, which is also the sisters' birthday, edith rings margaret and orders her to come over. earlier in the evening, edith had seen her boyfriend, police sergeant jim hobson (karl malden), when he gave her a wrist watch as a birthday present, but he was hurt and puzzled because she didn't want to spend the evening with him. she had hurried him away in order to make preparations before margaret's arrival, particularly altering her hairdo to the bob and bangs style margaret has. when margaret arrives, she admits there never really was a pregnancy, and edith shoots her in the head. jim, feeling uneasy, comes back just after the murder but hears what he assumes are the two sisters singing and joking together, and doesn't go up the stairs to check.  what he has actually heard is edith, aware of jim's presence, pretending to talk to her sister as she exchanges their clothes and jewelry and sets the corpse up to look like a suicide. she has a pang of regret at having to take off the watch jim gave her in order to put it on margaret's wrist  not only is she having to part with his gift, but it signifies that her old life and everything in it, including jim, is finished. she then returns to the delorca mansion and assumes margaret's identity, but while superficially she appears to look, talk and act like margaret, the staff notice differences, such as the house's great dane hating margaret but taking to edith immediately, and the fact that edith, unlike margaret, is a smoker. the maid (paul henreid's daughter monika in a small role) is puzzled when her mistress chooses not to put her very valuable jewelry in the safe, not realizing of course that edith has no idea what the combination is. eventually, because of her failure to imitate her sister's signature, required for papers pertaining to frank's estate, edith is forced to purposely burn her hand on a poker she has heated in the fire, in order to have a plausible excuse not to sign her name with her right hand.
meanwhile, jim visits "margaret" several times, asking questions about the death of edith, whom he loved. edith is troubled about having to lie to jim, who keeps commenting on the remarkable likeness between the sisters. she tries to offer him the wrist watch as a keepsake, a gesture jim recoils from; it feels to him that "margaret" is unaware of the significance of the watch, and it painfully reminds him of the birthday evening which was the last time, as far as he is concerned, that he ever saw edith alive.
edith's scheme runs into unforeseen trouble when she discovers that margaret had had a lover, tony (peter lawford), a louche would-be playboy who unexpectedly turns up and very quickly sees through her charade. tony blackmails edith over the killing of margaret, and receives very expensive jewelry as payment. edith then learns that margaret and tony had conspired to murder frank by poisoning him with arsenic. tony and edith quarrel; when he threatens her, margaret's great dane attacks and kills him.
jim has become suspicious about delorca's death and leads an investigation in which the police eventually exhume frank's body and find traces of arsenic. when jim arrives to arrest her, edith confesses her true identity. jim is repulsed and does not believe her, telling her "edie would never hurt a fly." 
henry, the faithful butler, is revealed to have known what was happening all along when he quietly asks what she would have him say at trial; she is touched and grateful that she has had a friend all through the deception, who even now is prepared to stand by her.
edith, as margaret, is tried, found guilty of murder, and sentenced to death. aware that she has indeed committed murder, although not the one she is being accused of, edith submits to justice. as she is taken away from the courthouse, a troubled jim approaches her and asks if she really is edith. because she loves him and wants to spare him any more doubt, or grief over losing her a second time, she enigmatically reminds him that "edith would never hurt a fly", and departs.


== cast ==


== notes ==
the plot of dead ringer had been made into a mexican film in 1946 as la otra, directed by roberto gavaldn and starring dolores del ro. dead ringer was remade in 1986 as killer in the mirror, a television movie starring ann jillian. the film takes place in los angeles and beverly hills. the interior scenes took place inside and outside the grounds of the greystone mansion in beverly hills. the bar scene took place at the corner of temple and figueroa in downtown los angeles. the burial scene took place inside the rosedale cemetery in los angeles.
the jazz combo in edie's bar was composed of electronic organist perry lee blackwell and drummer kenny dennis, both noted musicians, but uncredited in the film. blackwell can be seen as a lounge singer at the piano in the 1959 romantic comedy pillow talk, starring doris day and rock hudson.
this was the final film of cinematographer ernest haller. the trick process shots in a stolen life were created by him, and he improved upon the process here. makeup artist gene hibbs was hired due to his unique talent for making older actresses look younger through a "painting" technique.the film was directed by the actor paul henreid, davis' co-star in the 1942 romantic drama now, voyager. monika henried, one of his two daughters, plays janet (the maid).henreid called making the film "a wonderful experience".


== critical reception ==
the film has received acclaim from modern audiences and critics. it holds a 100% approval rating on rotten tomatoes, based on 9 reviews.


== references ==


== external links ==
dead ringer at imdb
dead ringer at allmovie
dead ringer at the tcm movie database
dead ringer at the american film institute catalog