dear mr. prohack is a 1949 british comedy film directed by thornton freeland. it is a modern-day version of arnold bennett's 1922 novel, mr prohack, as adapted in the play by edward knoblock. it stars cecil parker, glynis johns and dirk bogarde.


== plot ==
arthur prohack, a treasury civil servant who is extremely frugal with the government's money, suddenly inherits 250,000 and is convinced to go on six months' sick leave. his children charles and mary tap him for money for an investment scheme and a theatrical production respectively, whilst his wife eve buys the family a far larger house, which she fills with an aviary and then aquariums. charles also buys his father a new car, which on its first drive is involved in an accident with mimi warburton. initially frosty, he takes her on as his private secretary. charles cancels a meeting with arthur and arranges a board meeting without him - in vengeance mimi arranges for arthur 'accidentally' to take charles' place at a meeting with lady maslam, charles' patroness. left behind at home, charles and mimi lunch together and fall in love, leading her to try to tender her resignation, as on first taking the job with arthur she had agreed not to fall in love with charles.
arthur's friend sir paul spinner arranges to invest some of arthur's money, whilst eve arranges an elaborate party to celebrate mary's engagement to oswald morfrey, a sickly but forthright junior official at the ministry of agriculture. however, breaking free of mary's theatrical connections, the couple instead run away together and get married without their parents' knowledge - arthur hunts them down but oswald refuses his help. soon afterwards spinner informs arthur that a run on the stock-market means all the money he invested may be lost. mimi discovers that the investment scheme is also about to be ruined and argues with him at lady maslam's home, to which he had just gone to beg lady maslam's help.
relieved he is about to be free of the troubles of his new fortune, arthur retires to bed with a cold and has a fever dream inspired by arthurian legends on the bbc third programme. mimi wakes him to tell him that charles has broken up with her and is about to flee to paris with lady maslam, but when arthur rushes to the airport this proves to be a misunderstanding - charles has not boarded lady maslam's plane and returns home with arthur to propose to mimi. arthur discovers that - although spinner's advice has ruined charles' scheme - spinner has in fact managed to avoid the crash himself and make arthur another 250,000. arthur reconciles with eve and makes plans to move back to their old house and help oswald, mary and charles to more stable and healthy homes and jobs. he then returns to work and anonymously donates the new 250,000 to the treasury under the guise of a massive repayment of back-taxes.


== cast ==
(in credits order)


== critical reception ==
the new york times said, " it's an arnold bennett novel "modernized"and it shows its age in this translation."
tv guide said, " mediocre comedy with an excellent cast, including denholm elliott in his debut."
britmovie wrote, "cecil parker gives one of his best performances replicating his stage role."


== references ==


== external links ==
dear mr. prohack at imdb