deewana (transl.crazy) is a 1992 indian hindi-language action romantic drama film directed by raj kanwar in his directorial debut and produced by guddu dhanoa and lalit kapoor. the film stars rishi kapoor, divya bharti and shah rukh khan in leading roles, with amrish puri, mohnish behl, alok nath and sushma seth in supporting roles. this marked shahrukh khan's film debut. 
initially, khan's debut film was to be dil aashna hai (also co-starring divya bharti), but deewana was released first worldwide on 25 june 1992.
budgeted at 28 million, deewana went on to become the second highest-grossing film of 1992 behind beta, earning over 162.1 million worldwide. the film was a major box-office success and launched khan's bollywood career. it was later dubbed into tamil, telugu and bengali languages. additionally, deewana won a five leading accolades at the 38th filmfare awards. this film was remade in bangladesh as biyer phul directed by star director motin rahman starring shakil khan, shabnur & riaz released in 1999.


== plot ==
kajal, a beautiful young lady falls in love with and happily marries ravi, a rich famous singer whose greedy uncle dhirendra and cousin narendra want his wealth. narendra tries to rape kajal but is caught and beaten by ravi. dhirendra hires hoodlums to murder ravi. narendra and ravi fall off a cliff as ravi kills him before his death. the hoodlums also escape, and come again for revenge.
widowed and depressed, kajal moves to another city with ravi's mother laxmi who motivates her to begin a new life. raja, a handsome guy accidentally hits laxmi and meets kajal after getting subsequently slapped. he falls in love with her and confesses it but she reveals about being a widow.
raja's rich father ramakant who dislikes kajal tries to get rid of her after which raja cuts all ties with him and begs laxmi for marriage with kajal. laxmi persuades kajal who marries raja, but he tells him he will not touch her until she accepts him. 
raja now looks for a job. his friends open a garage with him. he meets with an accident and is hospitalised. kajal rushes to see and realises her love for him. they begin a new life. eventually, raja saves a man and befriends him who turns out to be an alive ravi.
when raja introduces ravi to kajal, she is shocked by learning that ravi survived dhirendra's attempt to murder him. however, she stays with raja. dhirendra learns about ravi. he kidnaps kajal and raja, demanding ravi's property in exchange. 
raja escapes and beats dhirendra along with ravi. they find kajal tied up with a bomb strapped around her. ravi manages to switch off it. dhirendra returns only to kill raja. ravi pushes him and sets the bomb off, causing a large explosion that kills the two for all. kajal and raja honour ravi's sacrifice.


== cast ==
rishi kapoor as ravi
divya bharti as kajal
shahrukh khan as raja sahai
amrish puri as dhirendra pratap
mohnish behl as narendra pratap (special appearance)
alok nath as mr.sharma
sushma seth as laxmi devi
dalip tahil as ramakant sahai, raja's father (special appearance)
deven verma as devdas sabrangi (special appearance)
asha sachdev as chandramukhi sabrangi (special appearance)
brahmachari as chintamani
ankush mohite as dhirendra pratap's henchman


== production ==
madhuri dixit was offered kajal's role but she declined it due to her busy schedule. divya bharti was later finalized to play kajal. originally, armaan kohli was signed to play the role of raja, but later walked out of the film during the first shooting schedule due to creative differences. the role then went to shah rukh khan, who was shooting for his debut film dil aashna hai at the time, which also co-starred bharti. however, as dil aashna hai got delayed to late-1992, deewana released in june 1992 and became khan's debut film. after kohli walked out of the film, sunny deol was approached. raza murad was the initial choice for dhirendra's role.


== reception ==
deewana was the second highest grossing indian film of 1992 after beta, grossing 162 million.
it was the highest sold music album of the year 1992.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack and background score were composed by nadeem-shravan and all the lyrics were penned by sameer. nadeem-shravan's soundtrack won them their third filmfare award and kumar sanu won filmfare award for best male playback singer in a row after aashiqui (1990) and saajan (1991). shah rukh's silver screen career began with the song "koi na koi chahiye" along with singer vinod rathod.
the film's soundtrack album sold between 7 million and 8 million units, making it the best-selling bollywood soundtrack album of 1992.the song aisi deewangi was the re-used version of the kannada song kanasalu neene manasalu neene from the 1976 kannada movie bayalu daari.


=== track listing ===


== awards and nominations ==


== references ==


== external links ==
deewana at imdb