deewangee (transl.obsession) is a 2002 indian psychological thriller film directed by anees bazmee and produced by nitin manmohan. the film stars akshaye khanna, urmila matondkar and ajay devgan. the music was composed by ismail darbar, with lyrics by salim bijnori and nusrat badr. this was devgn's first antagonist role and he won the filmfare best villain award. the plot of this movie is unofficially adopted from 1996 movie primal fear.


== plot ==
raj goyal (akshaye khanna), a young and successful criminal lawyer, famous for never having lost a case, is introduced to popular singer sargam (urmila matondkar) by music magnate ashwin mehta (vijayendra ghatge). the following day, ashwin is brutally murdered in his own house. the murderer, tarang bharadwaj(ajay devgn), who is sargam's childhood friend and music mentor, is caught red-handed at the crime scene. he claims he is innocent and sargam, who believes in tarang's innocence, approaches raj to defend him, which he accepts after meeting tarang.
realising him to have a mental illness, he hires a psychiatrist (seema biswas). to study his case. the psychiatrist finds out that tarang has split personality disorder, and his other personality goes by the name of ranjeet.
meanwhile, raj and sargam grow closer due to their frequent meetings and eventually fall in love.
raj speaks to ranjeet, who is a complete opposite of the innocent and simple tarang, and he admits to killing ashwin because, on the night of the party, ashwin had tried to molest sargam. ranjeet sees tarang as his younger brother who in turn considers sargam his wife.bringing his split personality in front of the court, raj is able to win the case and free tarang. but right after he is acquitted, raj finds out that the split personality disorder was an act put up by tarang to get out of jail. tarang then tells him to stay away from sargam.raj tries to reopen the case in order to protect sargam but fails, and tarang is moved to the mental hospital for a few days for his treatment. raj elongates his stay in the mental hospital by proving that he is still sick and needs more treatment. tarang is able to wriggle out of raj's attempt and is released.raj appoints personal security for sargam to ensure her safety, while tarang relentlessly tries to reach her, during which he seriously injures yana, sargam's assistant.
raj says that they can trap tarang with sargam performing a show and tarang coming there. but tarang successfully kidnaps sargam and takes her to an old fort where he had booked a vehicle to go abroad. sargam gives her location secretly to raj. sargam while trying to escape tells tarang that she loves raj to which tarang responds saying that then he has to kill raj. soon raj arrives and a fight ensues which ends with sargam overpowering tarang and pushing him into a nearby river.
the next morning the police are unsuccessful in finding his body.
the movie ends with sargam and raj enjoying a vacation and they hear someone sing one of tarang's songs. raj believes it cannot be tarang and because the song is so popular, anyone who can sing it.


== cast ==
ajay devgan as tarang/ ranjeet bharadwaj
akshaye khanna as raj goyal
urmila matondkar as sargam
farida jalal as mrs. goyal (raj's mother)
seema biswas as the psychiatrist
tiku talsania as ratan
tannaz irani as yana (sargam's friend and personal assistant)
rana jung bahadur as inspector rana
vijayendra ghatge as ashwin mehta
nirmal pandey as abhijeet mehta
suresh oberoi as mr. bhullar
suhasini mulay as the judge


== awards ==
won

filmfare best villain award  ajay devgn
star screen award best villain  ajay devgn
zee cine award best actor in a negative role  ajay devgnnominated

star screen award for best actor  akshaye khanna


== music ==
the soundtrack of the film contains nine songs. the music is conducted by composer ismail darbar. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 12,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's ninth highest-selling.


== box office ==
the film grossed  22 crore worldwide and was declared a below average at the box office.


== references ==


== external links ==
deewangee at imdb