derby day is a 1952 british drama film directed by herbert wilcox and starring anna neagle, michael wilding, googie withers, john mccallum, peter graves, suzanne cloutier and gordon harker. an ensemble piece, it portrays several characters on their way to the derby day races at epsom downs racecourse. it was an attempt to revive the success that neagle and wilding had previously had opposite each other, but it failed in this regard. in an effort to promote the film wilcox arranged for neagle to launch the film at the 1952 epsom derby. in the united states it was released as four against fate.
while making the film wilding began dating elizabeth taylor, who was in london filming ivanhoe, and later became her second husband.


== plot ==
on the morning of the epsom derby, a disparate group of people prepare to go to the races. lady helen forbes, a recently widowed aristocrat, is planning to make the journey in spite of the disapproval of her social set who consider it unseemly to go while still in mourning. david scott, a newspaper cartoonist, is ordered to go by his editor against his wishes. meanwhile, as part of a charity raffle, a dissolute film star, gerald berkeley, is to escort a wealthy grand dame to epsom for the day, something he is equally reluctant about. she falls and injures her leg, and her crafty housekeeper arranges for one of the young french maids to go in her place. 
meanwhile, in hackney, a lodger kills a man whose wife he is having an affair with. they plan to flee the country, and also travel to epsom, where he knows a tipster who may be able to smuggle them out.
helen and david meet and find themselves sharing confidences; they were both bereaved in the same air-crash. it seems likely that they will meet again. the lodger and the wife are spotted and arrested. and a taxi-drivers wife fulfils her life ambition to see the races.
the race featured is actually the derby of 1949.


== cast ==
anna neagle ...  lady helen forbes
michael wilding ...  david scott - the cartoonist
googie withers ...  betty molloy
john mccallum ...  tommy dillon
peter graves ...  gerald berkeley - film star
suzanne cloutier ...  michele jolivet
gordon harker ...  joe jenkins
edwin styles ...  sir george forbes
gladys henson ...  gladys jenkins
nigel stock ...  jim molloy
ralph reader ...  bill hammond
tom walls jr. ...  gilpin
josephine fitzgerald ...  o'shaughnessy - the cook
alfie bass ...  spider wilkes
toni edgar-bruce ...  mrs. harbottle-smith
ewan roberts ... jock, the studio driver
leslie weston ...  capt. goggs
sam kydd ...  harry bunn - the bookie
brian johnston ...  interviewer
richard wattis ... newspaper editor
frank webster ... taxi driver
gerald anderson ...  police sergeant (uncredited)
robert brown ...  foster - berkeley's butler (uncredited)
john chandos ...  man on train (uncredited)
cyril conway ...  hinchcliffe - coalman (uncredited)
mary gillingham ...  2nd maid (uncredited)
arthur hambling ...  col. tremaine (uncredited)
h.r. hignett ...  lawson - lady forbes' butler (uncredited)
prince monolulu ...  himself (uncredited)
myrette morven ...  mrs. tremaine (uncredited)
hugh moxey ...  police constable (uncredited)
jan pilbeam ...  1st maid (uncredited)
derek prentice ...  old man (uncredited)
philip ray ...  2nd newspaper reporter (uncredited)
michael ripper ...  1st newspaper reporter (uncredited)
cecily walper ...  mrs. wickham - housekeeper


== references ==


=== bibliography ===
harper, sue & porter, vincent. british cinema of the 1950s: the decline of deference. oxford university press, 2007.
mayer, geoff. guide to british cinema. greenwood publishing, 2003.
walker, alexander. elizabeth. orion, 1997.


== external links ==
derby day at imdb