devathaiyai kanden (transl.i saw an angel) is a 2005 indian tamil-language romantic drama film written and directed by boopathy pandian. the film stars dhanush and sridevi vijaykumar in the lead roles. the film borrows its name from a hit song from another dhanush-starrer kaadhal kondein. the movie went on to become a commercial success. the film was remade in kannada as jaaji mallige.


== plot ==
babu is a struggling tea-vendor who makes a living out of selling milk tea, carrying the business on his bicycle. he falls in love with uma, a rich college girl. gradually, uma also reciprocates babu's feelings for his good nature and things go smoothly for a while.
uma's parents find her a wealthy groom who is well educated. uma is in a dilemma on whom to choose as her life partner. she thinks of her future if she chooses the impoverished babu where she visualizes herself giving birth to a child in a government hospital, her husband unable to raise required money for her medical expenses and overall a very difficult life; in contrast to a life where she is pampered by everyone, her every need taken care of almost instantly if she chooses to marry the groom selected by her parents.
while babu is on a religious trip to sabarimala, the girl decides to marry the groom bala so that she can continue to lead a comfortable life. babu is devastated when he learns of this and heartbroken when uma goes to the extent of shouting at him. he accuses her parents for changing her mind.
in a unique way, babu files a case against uma for not holding the promise made to him of sharing a life together for a good 50 years. the case soon gathers momentum and has the public discussing it everywhere. as the case progresses, several sacrifices made by babu for the sake of uma come into light through revelations made by people known to him and by his close friends. uma has a change of heart and on the final day of the hearing, decides to re-unite with babu.
when uma offers a rose to babu, he refuses to accept her, saying that the case was filed not to win her back, but to teach a lesson to her and every girl with an attitude identical. he justifies further by saying that yesterday she hated him because of his status but today she loves him and tomorrow she may again find him unattractive. babu also says that as he did not know english, she left him. while leaving the court complex, much to the surprise of the visibly embarrassed uma, he tells his last word to her in his known english, "goodbye".


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by deva.


== production ==
dhanush signed the film, then titled ennai mattum kadhal pannu, soon after the success of thulluvadho ilamai and the venture was initially set to star sherin, who appeared alongside him in that film. since then, the title and the heroine went through a couple of changes, briefly being referred to as kadhal sughamanathu, kadhalna summava, and then finally as devathaiyai kanden, after the popular song of dhanush-starrer kadhal kondein. sridevi vijayakumar replaced sherin as heroine in the film.the film was delayed as dhanush had signed on to appear in several other films following the success of kaadhal kondein (2003). other projects he prioritised over devathaiyai kanden included pudhukottaiyilirundhu saravanan (2004), sullan (2004), dreams (2004) and adhu oru kana kaalam (2005). he also worked on a number of dropped films during the period including k. s. ravikumar's odipolaaa, selvaraghavan's doctors, sibi chakravarthy's raghava and manmadha rasa.


== box office ==
the film was a commercial success grossing more than $2 million at the box office.


== references ==