deyyam (english: ghost) is a 1996 telugu horror film, written, produced and directed by ram gopal varma.


== plot ==
the plot begins with a man returning home late at night. he  passes through a graveyard on his way home and he tries to interact with a ghost that he has mistaken for a woman and follows her. he is ambushed and killed by the ghost. the story then moves to a happy couple murali and sindhu (jayasudha), who live with their 3-year-old son chinni (master ravi chandra padmala) and sindhu's sister mahi (maheswari). they  plan to buy a strange new farm house, which is near the same graveyard shown during the beginning of the movie. sindhu's sister, mahi (maheswari) is in love with her boyfriend, narsing (j. d. chakravarthy) and they often hang out together. problems start to rise when sindhu's son  starts making imaginary friends in their new home. it is later revealed that his "imaginary friends" are ghosts. a sequence of events happen proving the presence of ghosts in the house. things grow worse when chinni becomes prey to the ghosts and is killed under mysterious circumstances. sindhu sees the ghost of chinni and feels that he is still alive. sindhu gets mentally upset and starts to look for chinni everywhere around the house. meanwhile, narsing, once while waiting for mahi near their house by the graveyard one night, comes across the same ghost (seen during the beginning of the movie) and mistakes it for mahi and the ghost tries to attack him. he somehow escapes from there. later, after inquiring with his friends, he comes to know from his friends that a builder built the farm house on top of a graveyard and there are a lot of rumors in circulation that the place has a demonic presence. narsing understands that mahi's family is in serious trouble. he warns mahi to move away from that house immediately, repeatedly. but mahi, raised as an atheist, doesn't pay heed to his words. the ghosts continue to haunt and kill the family members one after the other. the story comes to the climax, where it is revealed that the entire area around the farmhouse is infested with ghosts. the undead rise from their graves and it boils down to mahi and narsing remaining (everyone including mahi's family joins the undead). they manage to flee from the farmhouse and return to narsing's house. to their horror, they find the ghosts of mahi's family and other known people around the farmhouse waiting for them. the final scene shows that they're cornered by the ghosts and surrounded. the film concluded with an uncertain ending as to whether they escape and survive or not.


== cast ==
j. d. chakravarthy as narsing, mahi's boyfriend
maheswari as mahi, sindhu's younger sister
jayasudha as sindhumathi "sindhu"
ajinkya deo as murali, sindhu's husband
master ravichandra padmala as chinni, sindhu's son
jeeva as a madman
ramjagan as a man who was killed by group of ghosts in the beginning of the movie
tanikella bharani as psychologist


== track listing ==


== trivia ==
composer sathyam scored the title track "debbaku tha dongala mutha" for dongala mutha (2011), his second collaboration with ram gopal varma after deyyam.
harris jayaraj played the keyboard, while mani sharma worked as the assistant music director to sathyam for deyyam.


== references ==


== external links ==
deyyam at imdb