dhaai akshar prem ke (transl.two and half letters of love) is a 2000 indian hindi-language romantic drama film. it was the first of seven films in which currently married couple abhishek bachchan and aishwarya rai starred together. the film is a remake of the 1995 hollywood film a walk in the clouds and the 1998 tamil film, pooveli.


== plot ==
the plot revolves around a young girl sahiba who witnesses the brutal murder of a young woman inside her college campus. the perpetrators follow her as she tries to flee home. she is rescued by karan, an army captain, who sees the men assaulting her at the train station. during the journey, sahiba reveals that she is in a very difficult spot. she cannot go back to college because the murderers will be looking for her. and she does not want to go home because she had jokingly told her aunt on the phone that she has gotten married in the city. her parents now expect her to come home with her husband. she does not want to go home and face their wrath. karan offers to escort her home. 
however, when sahiba arrives home with karan her family mistakes him for her husband. the two do not get a chance to clarify the situation. the next day when karan tries to leave, sahibas grandmother thinks he is abandoning her granddaughter and has a heart attack. karan decides to stay and pretend that he is sahibas husband until the grandmother recovers. sahiba falls in love with karan over the next few days. however, karan wants to leave and return home to the girl he loves. 
sahibas father, yogi is livid when karan eventually leaves and sahiba tells everyone the truth. he arranges her marriage to vicky, the son of a family friend rai singhal. on the day of the engagement, sahiba finds out that vicky is none other than the man who murdered the girl in her hostel. she tries telling her father but he refuses to believe her. 
in the meantime, karan realizes that he loves sahiba and returns to her house. however, yogi slaps him and tells him to leave. 
raunaq, sahiba's uncle, believes her and helps her meet karan secretly. karan promises to rescue sahiba. he proves to yogi that vicky and his father only want his daughter for her inheritance. and that they plan on killing her after the marriage because she witnessed the murder. vicky and his father attack yogi and karan when they realize that they have been exposed. they tie up yogi and karan in yogi's factory and set it on fire. however, the two escape and proceed to stop vicky and sahiba's wedding. just as things start looking up sahiba collapses. having given up on karan, she had consumed poison before the wedding ceremony. she is rushed to the hospital and manages to survive. in the end, she is reunited with karan.


== cast ==
abhishek bachchan as captain karan khanna
aishwarya rai bachchan as sahiba grewal/sahiba karan khanna
salman khan as truck driver (special appearance)
amrish puri as yogvendra yogi grewal
anupam kher as ronak grewal
shakti kapoor as pritam grewal
sushma seth as yogi's mom
dalip tahil as rai bahadur tejeshwar singhal
indra mohan singh as vickey singhal (tejeshwar's son)
tanvi azmi as simran grewal
himani shivpuri as sweety s. grewal
sonali bendre as nisha
hrishikesh pandey as sameer (sam) (nisha's husband)


== soundtrack ==
the movie did not do well commercially and critically, but the soundtrack of this movie became very popular. the lyrics were penned by sameer. all the songs were sung by anuradha paudwal along with babul supriyo, kk & sudesh bhosle


== trivia ==
aishwarya rai and abhishek bachchan, the lead characters, are married in real life.
aishwarya rai dated salman khan from 1999 until the couple separated in 2001.
salman khan makes a brief cameo in the movie.
sonali bendre made a special appearance in the movie as "nisha".


== references ==


== external links ==
dhaai akshar prem ke at imdb