dhamaal ( english translation: fun) is a 2007 indian comedy film directed by indra kumar and produced by ashok thakeria. the film stars sanjay dutt, ritesh deshmukh, arshad warsi, aashish chaudhary and javed jaffrey in the lead roles while asrani, sanjay mishra, vijay raaz, manoj pahwa and tiku talsania are featured in supporting roles. it is heavily inspired from the 2001 american comedy film rat race directed by jerry zucker (which in turn was inspired by stanley kramer's 1963 classic it's a mad, mad, mad, mad world). it is the first installment of the dhamaal film series. the film was remade in 2008 as the kannada film mast maja maadi.
in 2011, the film spawned a sequel, under the title of double dhamaal, with the lead cast reprising their roles.a third reboot sequel, under the name total dhamaal was released in february 2019, with only deshmukh, warsi and jaffrey returning with an entirely new cast and a fresh story, having no connections to dhamaal and double dhamaal.


== plot ==
four good-for-nothing friends - roy (ritesh deshmukh), adi (arshad warsi), boman (aashish chaudhary), and manav (javed jaffrey) - are kicked out of their house by their landlady (suhasini mulay) for not paying their rents. desperate to earn money, they devise up a plan. adi tells manav to steal a painting from the house. they decide to sell it to the son of the late businessman dwiwedi. however, manav accidentally picks up a blank painting not knowing the reality. they humorously sell the painting for rs.20,000 to dwiwedi. they then pick up the original painting with the intention to sell it to mr. aggarwal, not knowing that he has been murdered. the case is handled by inspector kulkarni (murli sharma). he learns that before mr. aggrawal was murdered, he was speaking on the phone to somebody and he mentioned the words "horse" and "grass." he interprets these words to be some code language. the four arrive at agrawal's residence. kulkarni demands to see the painting. seeing the horse and grass on the painting, he immediately arrests them.
while driving on the highway, kulkarni frees the foursomes upon being informed that they are innocent. the four are overjoyed until they suddenly witness a car accident and encounter the dying driver, don bose (prem chopra). he tells them that he has hidden a treasure of 10 crore in the st. sebastian garden in goa under a big 'w'. he tells them to divide the money equally among themselves and then dies. they come across inspector kabir nayak (sanjay dutt) who has been trying to arrest bose for the past ten years. he tries to extract information from the four but in vain, and they escape from there and decide to travel to goa. desperate for his promotion, kabir is determined to capture the four. all four friends steal boman's car which belongs to his father nari (asrani), who loves his car more than his son and threw his son out after he damaged his car. the friends manage to steal their car but not before hitting nari on the head and making him unconscious. roy loses control of the car in a forest and hits it against a tree, breaking both headlights. they decide to spend the night in the car. the next day kabir is transferred to yavatmal for failing to capture bose. furious, he walks towards his table where nari is waiting for him to file a complaint against his son for stealing his car. he gives kabir the photos of boman and his car. meanwhile, all four come across a broken bridge which is the only way through the forest. they decide to jump the car but boman is reluctant to do so. they manage to jump the car to the other side but it crashes and explodes.
kabir tracks the four down after discovering the destroyed car. he is able to learn the location of the treasure due to manav's dumbness. he ties all four of them to a tree and sets off. however they manage to escape and it is revealed that roy had actually cut the engine wires of kabir's car so he must have not gone too far. they reach a dhaba and pretend to be detectives. they make the villagers and the dhaba owner believe that kabir is pasha, a dangerous gang leader and lures them to capture him for the reward would be rs. 15 lakhs. kabir defeats the villagers and he and the four arrive at a settlement - 60% would belong to the four and 40% would belong to kabir. but adi insists on having his and manav's money in separate shares when they were planning to pay boman as one share for damaging his car. consequently, a fight ensues and is decided that whoever reaches the treasure first would take all the money.
all four part ways and try to reach goa as soon as possible. roy encounters a dacoit babu bhai (sanjay mishra) and agree to divide the money among themselves provided they reach goa as soon as possible. boman also encounters his father. though nari initially wants to kill his son, he changes his mind after he learns about the ten crores. adi and manav travel together. kabir nearly escapes death as he hangs off a cliff and is pushed to deal with some school children who were supposed to visit and perform at a charity event. adi and manav fail to hitch a ride to take them to goa until they bump into iyer, who irritates them throughout the journey by continuously extending his patronymic name while introducing himself. 
nari and boman find a private pilot but hilarious conditions cause the duo to fly in utter despair when the pilot abandons the steer and collapses into alcoholism while airline customer service provider d.k. malik pushes them to near madness, failing to save himself, but they manage to reach goa. finally, as they together reach the garden, they mutually agree to find the treasure together before dividing it. manav is able to locate four palm trees which make the shape of a 'w' when a crow defecates on adi. but kabir arrives there and tells them to divide the money against them to which all agree. they dig there and are able to find the money. but again a fight ensues over the payment for the damage of the car. all are enraged when adi and manav decide to pay the money as one unit but are separate units while taking money. the fight goes on during which kabir takes all the money and runs. he tries to escape in a hot air balloon on a beach but finds it tied to a pole. he dives in an effort to cut the rope but is beaten up by the rest who pursue him. the balloon blows off shore and all are disheartened. 
conditions change when the wind changes direction and the balloon again blows onshore. night falls and they follow the balloon in a towing van. the balloon clashes against a pole and the bag falls down. all of them try to collect as much money as they can when suddenly some spot lights focus on them and a crowd cheers loudly behind them. realizing that they are on a stage and the occasion is the charity event to be attended by the performing children who were with kabir, they further learn about the pathetic condition of the orphaned kids who were to be honored through charity, and decide to donate the money to the orphans. at the end, the chief guest of the event - commissioner m.i chaturvedi, who is kabir's boss, praises all of them, while also telling kabir that he will receive his promotion and that there is no better of use of this money than giving it for a charitable cause.
the film ends on a happy note conveying that the fate of the money was already decided. it never belonged to the four friends. they were just a medium which helped the money reach its true destination.


== cast ==
sanjay dutt as inspector kabir naik
riteish deshmukh as deshbandhu roy / fake kabir naik
arshad warsi as aditya "adi" shrivastav
aashish chaudhary as boman contractor
javed jaffrey as manav shrivastav
prem chopra as bose
asrani as nari contractor, boman's eccentric father
tiku talsania as commissioner m.i. chaturvedi
vijay raaz as dev kumar malik / d. k. malik
suhasini mulay as the landlady
sanjay mishra as babu bhai a.k.a atank ka dusra naam (terror's second name)
murli sharma as inspector kulkarni
vinay apte as prabhakarna sripalawardhana atapattu jayasuriya laxmana shivramkrishna shivavenkata rajshekhara srinivasana trichipalli yekyaparampeel parambatur chinnaswami mutthuswami venugopala iyer
vijay patkar as air traffic controller
rana jung bahadur as kailash the owner of the dhaba
surendra rajan as orphanage man
ninad kamat as function host
manoj pahwa as pilot amyjot randhawa
kiku sharda as constable
d. santosh as encounter cop
sahil chauhan as kid himesh reshammiya
kurush deboo as dwivedi's son (victim of conmen's fraud painting)
sanjay swaraj as samir agarwal (special appearance)
karmveer choudhary in kaiash da dhaba
vaibhav mathur as dacoit's man
vishwajeet soni as bengali car driver
jayesh thakkar as taxi driver


== soundtrack ==
the film's soundtrack is composed by adnan sami with lyrics penned by sameer. the songs, "dekho dekho" and "miss india marthi mujhpe", were both known as the title song, since the main chorus of both the songs included the title "dhamaal".


=== track listing ===
all lyrics are written by sameer; all music is composed by adnan sami.


== sequel ==
a sequel named double dhamaal was released in 2011. the third film of the franchise was named total dhamaal and released in 2019. both the films became huge box office hits.


== references ==


== external links ==
dhamaal at imdb 
dhamaal at bollywood hungama