dhan dhana dhan goal (english: get set goal) is a 2007 indian hindi sports drama film which was released on 23 november 2007, produced by ronnie screwvala and directed by vivek agnihotri for utv motion pictures. the film stars john abraham, bipasha basu, arshad warsi and boman irani. the film's soundtrack is composed by pritam with lyrics by javed akhtar. dhan dhana dhan goal is a contemporary fictional story of the south asian community in the uk, told through the prism of professional football. the film received positive reviews though the film was only moderately successful at the box-office and was declared "average" by box office india. the film was premiered in the tous les cinemas du monde (world cinema) section of 2007 cannes film festival.the plot is said to resemble the 2004 hollywood movie dodgeball: a true underdog story.


== plot ==
jaidev and kavita bhasin live a middle-classed lifestyle in southall, england,with their son, sunny. 
during the mid-80s jaidev was a huge fan of the all-asian southall football club, and their team was very successful so much so that it generated hatred from opposing mainstream caucasian teams, who attacked jaidev and the team's star player, tony singh.
this spelled the end of the team, and the ground was then rented out for weddings and birthday parties. jaidev wanted sunny to play for southall, but sunny believed himself to be british and joined the aston football club. 
when the time comes for selection, sunny, often referred to as 'paki', is sidelined. embittered, he joins the southall club, and he, and the captain shaan ali khan, as well as coach tony singh, steer the team to many victories including a place in the semi-finals. 
however, just before southall team intends to play against gatwick, they get the news that sunny has switched to another more prestigious club in exchange for a fancy sports car, a four bedroom mansion, a handsome signing amount, and a generous weekly allowance. 
this leaves southall to turn its ground over to the chair of the city council who wants to demolish it, and build a shopping mall and theme park in its place. his actions prompt the community to ostracise him for his betrayal and treat him with contempt and disdain. 
however, sunny eventually discovers the truth of his father's attack and support for southall. deeply moved he rejects his contract and heads back to help southall win the final match against aston and redeems himself to his team mates and community.


== cast ==
john abraham as sunny bhasin
bipasha basu as rumana
arshad warsi as shaan ali khan
boman irani as tony singh
dalip tahil as johny bakshi
rajendranath zutshi as monty singh
dibyendu bhattacharya as debashis
kushal punjabi as ranveer goalie
saurabh dubey as jaidev bhasin, sunnys father
judan ali as himself
towsif jahan as semi-professional footballer
sana khan as item number for song billo rani
ajay kalyansingh as southall united football fan


== crew ==
banner: utv motion pictures
presenter: utv motion pictures
producer: ronnie screwvala
director: vivek agnihotri
writer: rohit malhotra
co-producers: zarina mehta & deven khote; krishan khanna (hanwell london)
music director: pritam
lyrics: javed akhtar
director of photography: attar singh saini
screenplay: vikramaditya motwane
dialogues: anurag kashyap & rohit malhotra
production designer: nitin chandrakant desai
editor: hemal kothari
cinematography: atarsingh saini
choreography: saroj khan
football consultant: andrew owusu ansah
associate producers: alpana mishra, ram mirchandani & siddharth roy kapur
supervising producers: rajesh nair & prem pillai


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack for the film was released on november 2007. it has been given a rating of 3 out of 5 on indiafm.com.lyrics by javed akhtar. background score by sanjoy chowdhury, the son of late maestro sri salil chowdhury.


=== critical reception ===
indiafm.com gave the film 3 out of 5, saying that "on the whole, dhan dhana dhan goal has an ordinary first hour, but the post-interval portions, especially the exhilarating climax, makes up for everything."


== production ==
the film had the working title of goal until august 2007.


=== locations ===
while the film was being shot at the millwall football club, abhishek bachchan and aishwarya rai made a surprise appearance to watch the filming of dhan dhana dhan goal.old trafford the stadium of manchester united is shown during a scene where tony tries to inspire the players to play for more than themselves for honour, glory and pride by telling them the story of the munich air disaster and how manchester united fought through the odds. the cast got to shoot inside the dressing room too. '


== sequel ==
after the release of dhan dhana dhan goal, director vivek agnihotri announced that there will be a sequel to the film titled goal 2. and that the sequel would have the same principal cast of john abraham, arshad warsi, bipasha basu and boman irani. however, in a talk-show where the director was present to promote his upcoming 2019 release, it has been confirmed by vivek agnihotri that no sequel would be made.


== see also ==
list of sports films


== references ==


== external links ==
dhan dhana dhan goal at imdb