dhee (lit.'clash') is a 2007 indian telugu-language action romantic comedy film starring vishnu manchu and genelia d'souza. it was directed and produced by srinu vytla. the film released on 13 april 2007. the film was remade into tamil under the title mirattal and in bengali as khokababu (2012).


== plot ==
srinivas "babloo" rao (vishnu manchu) is a happy-go-lucky guy who likes to have fun with his friends and always gets into trouble. because of this, his father narayana rao (chandra mohan) gets him a job with shankar goud (srihari), a local mafia head don leader. shankar and ballu (supreeth), a dreaded local goon, are rivals, and ballu is determined to kill shankar's sister pooja (genelia d'souza) to avenge his brother's (ajay) death because he murdered the couple, and now he is killed by shankar. babloo falls in love with pooja, but shankar is planning an arranged marriage for her with ajay (jai akash), an nri doctor. babloo and pooja elope to get married, and babloo later saves pooja from ballu. the rest of the story tells how babloo marries pooja and how shankar finishes ballu to protect his sister.
in the end, shankar lets ajay marry another girl, and ajay agrees and goes back to the usa. when shankar finds out that babloo and pooja are falling in love with each other, shankar and his henchmen badly beat babloo. srirangam sheshadri chary (brahmanandam), one of shankar's employees, calls narayana and tells him that shankar is trying to kill babloo. narayana comes and tells the goons to let babloo go. one of shankar's henchmen, who is also his right hand (brahmaji), cheats him. shankar fires babloo and tells him to never come back because he thinks that babloo and pooja fell in love with each other. on the way to the wedding, one of ballu's henchmen blocks five cars of shankar's henchmen, and now shankar, pooja, and brahmaji are trapped. when ballu and his henchmen are there, brahmaji gives shankar a gun to shoot him, and he does. however, the gun does not have bullets, and shankar is shocked to see that brahmaji has been working for ballu all along. ballu tricks shankar, and according to his plan, he planned to handover shankar & pooja. shankar, in a fit of rage, kills almost all of ballu's henchmen, including brahmaji, but he is brutally injured, and ballu finally kidnaps pooja.
chary knows about this and tells babloo that shankar is injured and pooja is abducted by ballu. ballu calls shankar on the phone and tells them that he will kill pooja if he couldnt find a way to rescue pooja in three hours. shankar tells babloo that babloo could marry pooja if he kills all of ballu's henchmen, to which he agrees. shankar and babloo find out that pooja is held captive in an almost abandoned building. babloo fights ballu's henchmen, while shankar fights ballu. shankar finally defeats ballu. the film ends with shankar letting pooja marry babloo and them doing so. pooja also gives birth to a first child.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==


== trivia ==
this movie was remade into oriya as tu mo girlfriend (2011).
this was only film in which chakri and sreenu vaitla worked together.
nani worked as an assistant director in this film before making his acting debut 2 years later in ashta chamma.


== sequel ==
director srinu vaitla announced the sequel of the film with manchu vishnu reprising in the same character on 23 november 2020. the film is titled as d and d - double dose.


== dubbed versions ==
it was dubbed in hindi as sabse badi hera pheri and it was dubbed in bhojpuri as jo humse takarie chur chur ho jai these two dubbed versions was distributed by goldmines telefilms.


== references ==


== external links ==
dhee at imdb