dhol (english: 'drum') is a 2007 indian hindi-language comedy thriller film directed by priyadarshan, and produced under the percept picture company. the film stars tusshar kapoor, sharman joshi, kunal khemu, rajpal yadav, tanushree dutta and om puri  in lead roles while arbaaz khan, abhimanyu singh, payal rohatgi, murli sharma, asrani and tiku talsania are featured in supporting yet crucial roles. the movie is a remake of the 1990 malayalam film in harihar nagar written by siddique-lal which was already remade in hindi in 1992 as parda hai parda starring chunky pandey. the flm released on 21 september 2007, and received mixed response from critics upon release; however, became a moderate box office success.


== plot ==
sameer (tusshar kapoor), pankaj (sharman joshi), gautam (kunal khemu) and martand (rajpal yadav) are bound together by their ambition to make it big in life with the least effort possible. each one tries his hand at finding a short cut to success but ends up being in even deeper trouble. things get worse when the four decide to take some desperate measures to end their misery once and for all. they take loan from martands maternal uncle (tiku talsania) at very high interest so he always hits martand.
they try to impress their grandparents, but are unable. as gautam tries to impress her grandmother(farida dadi) and martand tries to impress dadaji (om puri). but there plan fails.
they believe that the only way to get rich without working hard is to marry a wealthy girl. as luck would have it, a rich girl ritu (tanushree dutta) arrives in their neighborhood. all four set out with their individual plans to marry her but end up discovering a shocking truth. ritu came to the city to find about her brother's killers.
all four of them try to impress ritu but meanwhile, they discover that ritu's brother died along with another friend of ritu's brother. they try hard and finally pankaj is decided to marry ritu. soon before marriage, ritu finds the secret that her brother and his friend were in contact of a notorious gang leader zikomo (murali sharma). also, ritu finds that these four were bluffing all time just to impress her and so she starts avoiding them. one day zikomo finds them and kidnaps ritu and her family members. he reveals himself to be the true killer and he confesses about killing rahul and jay. he asks for them to hand over a drum if they wanted to see him alive, but ritu's family members do not know about any drum. a fight ensues and zikomo is killed in a self-explosion in the end. ritu hands over the drum and the four of them find it filled with money, realizing that zikomo was after the money and not the drum. they take the money and the film ends.


== cast ==
tusshar kapoor as sameer "sam" arya
sharman joshi as pankaj "pakya" tiwari / jaishankar jai yadav
kunal khemu as gautam "goti" sisodia
rajpal yadav as martand " maru" dhamdhere
tanushree dutta as ritu tripathi
murli sharma as inspector zikomo
om puri as mr. tripathi, ritus grandfather
arbaaz khan as jaishankar "jai" yadav
abhimanyu singh as rahul tripathi, ritus brother
payal rohatgi as sophie ; jai's fiance
tiku talsania as inspector subhash dongre (mama) ; martand's uncle
asrani as pankaj's brother in-law
baby farida as mrs. tripathi, ritus grandmother
rasika joshi as landlady
tareena patel as kanika


== soundtrack ==


=== track listing ===


== references ==


== external links ==
dhol at imdb
dhol movie review at indicine.com