dhruvam (, english: pole) is a 1993 malayalam action thriller film directed by joshiy, where story and dialogue are by s. n. swamy and a. k. sajan and screenplay by s. n. swamy. it stars mammootty, jayaram,  suresh gopi, vikram, gautami and tiger prabhakar. its music was composed by s. p. venkatesh. it was vikram's debut in malayalam cinema. the film was a commercial success and was one of the highest grossing movies of the year behind manichitrathazhu and devasuram.


== plot ==
an araachar(hangman) from tamil nadu is brought to central jail to hang hyder marakkar (tiger prabhakar), a notorious criminal with terror links, but he is killed in a road accident. dig marar (janardhanan) smells foul play as hangmen are either murdered, bribed or threatened. his efforts to bring hangmen from other states are also in vain as all of them are simply too afraid to hang hyder. he goes to kamakshipuram along with jose nariman (suresh gopi), a smart and young police officer, to meet narasimha mannadiar (mammootty), a revered village lord and member of the royal family who had once ruled the hamlet. he is worshipped and revered by his villagers. mannadiar is known for his generous and fearless attitude, and his thirst for justice and peace for his village has made him an enemy in the eyes of politicians and a certain group of police officers. while on the search for the state's hangman, mannadiar and dig marar luckily meets the hangman's brother kasi (t. g. ravi) who agrees to come to hang hyder. the movie progresses with a series of flashbacks intertwined with the present.
upon nariman's request, ponmani (babu namboothiri), mannadiar's secretary, shares with him a few stories from mannadiar's life that made him popular. one among them was shared with veerasimha mannadiar (jayaram), his younger brother. veeran liked maya (rudra) and informed mannadiar about it. a few days before the marriage, a young man (vikram) arrived at mannadiar's house, introducing himself as bhadran, a man in love with maya. he also added that her parents had agreed to the marriage without maya's consent. mannadiar called off veeran's marriage and got maya and bhadran married. bhadran was a gang member of marakkar who did not want to kill the dig. hence, bhadran was a target of the gang. veeran saves bhadran and the latter is appointed as mannadiar's driver. marakkar kills dig marar's son for revenge and also kills veeran as he would have been an eye witness. from that day onwards, mannadiar waits for the chance to avenge for his brother's death. upon hearing the story, nariman decides to help mannadiar. although convicted by court for execution, marakkar tries every possible way to escape. mannadiar's battle of revenge against marakkar forms the rest of the story.
in the end, mannadiar and bhadran get themselves taken to the jail where hyder has been kept. while transferring hyder to another jail, mannadiar, along with bhadran, kidnaps hyder with nariman's assistance. hyder challenges mannadiar to a fair fight, where he initially overpowers mannadiar, who soon gets the better of him. in the process, in order to save mannadiar from a bomb thrown by hyder's associates, nariman catches the bomb and falls on it, which explodes, killing him. mannadiar then hangs hyder from a tree. at the court, mannadiar takes the full responsibility for the murders thereby making bhadran a pardoned-witness and mannadiar gets the death sentence.


== cast ==


== music ==
the songs and background score were composed by s. p. venkatesh.


== trivia ==
it was vikram's first malayalam film.
this was the last combination of mammootty and suresh gopi before twenty:20, except for a cameo role in the king.
dinesh baboo served as the cinematographer, replacing joshiy's frequent collaborator jayanan vincent.


== references ==


== external links ==
dhruvam at imdb
dhruvam - movie reviews, videos, wallpapers, photos, cast & crew, story & synopsis on popcorn.oneindia.in