dil kya kare (english: what should the heart do?) is a 1999 indian drama film, directed by prakash jha and produced by veeru devgan and veena devgan. the film stars ajay devgn, mahima chaudhry, kajol and chandrachur singh in lead roles.


== plot ==
this story is about tragic love which begins in tragedy and ends in tragedy.
anand (ajay devgn) lives happily with his wife kavita (mahima chaudhry) and neha, whom the couple adopted because kavita suffered a miscarriage.
a lady starts stalking neha and meets her up daily at school. after some time, she befriends neha and neha starts calling her "sweet aunty" and introduces her to her mother kavita, who invites her home.
the stranger introduces herself as "nandita" (kajol) and requests to spend more time with neha. so kavita lets her stay in their home as a nanny. however, deeply buried secrets threaten to surface when nandita and anand come face-to-face as it is revealed that they are the biological parents of neha.
their short-lived tragic history is revealed: anand and nandita were traveling by train when thugs took over and tried to rape/kill nandita. anand saved nandita's life and the two became attracted and made love. they did not meet after this night. 
anand moved on with his life while a pregnant nandita was forced to give up her child (neha) for adoption.
anand and nandita try to hide their past from kavita at first, though anand tries many times to meet with nandita alone and talk to her, anxious to know why and where she mysteriously disappeared even though he tried to find her.
however, kavita finds out the truth and is disgusted with nandita. heartbroken, nandita promises to leave the family alone on one condition - to take neha with her. kavita becomes frantic, as she refuses to give up neha and anand reluctantly supports kavita after realizing how desperate she is to keep neha.
when nandita realizes that anand and kavita love neha and are not ready to give her up, she decides to leave her daughter in their care and go away forever. 
anand is shocked at this and runs to the train station alone without kavita. he makes it just in time to see nandita on the moving train, peering at him with tear-filled eyes and he helplessly watches her leave with a heavy heart.


== cast ==
ajay devgn as anand kishore
kajol as nandita rai
mahima chaudhry as kavita kishore
chandrachur singh as somu dutt
farida jalal as nandita's aunt
laxmikant berde as ram dulare sinha
akshita garud as neha kishore
mohan joshi as nandita's father
anant mahadevan as dcp krishan kumar
rajpal yadav as a school watchmen
avtar gill as a lawyer
rajendra gupta as a lawyer
dinesh hingoo
achla sachdev
aroon bakshi
sameer dharmadhikari
pushpa varma
rakhi sawant
manohar singh
yogi singh


== box office ==
dil kya kare grossed $285,000 in the us and 204,547 in uk. the film had a weak heart in the united states, suffered a financial haemorrhage in the second weekend, grossing $54,000 on screens, crashing to 51st position  on the box-office chart from 27th. but it fared far better in the united kingdom. it has remained at no 14 there on 22 screens for two weeks.


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
dil kya kare at imdb