dil vil pyar vyar is a 2002 indian hindi romantic musical film featuring an ensemble cast led by madhavan, jimmy shergill, and sanjay suri. the film was inspired by the songs of music composer r. d. burman and won positive reviews upon release in october 2002.


== plot ==
the first love story is about love getting a second chance. devdarshan suri alias dev (sanjay suri) is a widower, his wife payal (dipannita sharma) dies soon after their honeymoon. he moves to mumbai from pune with his sister rachna (bhavna pani). here he meets gauri (sonali kulkarni), who lives with her psychosomatically ill brother gaurav (rakesh bapat).
though they fall in love, the shadow of gaurav's illness is always between them. and then rachna falls in love with gaurav: the second love story.
the third story is one of how love can be swallowed by ego, pride and insecurity. krish kumar (madhavan) and raksha (namrata shirodkar) are happily married. both are aspiring singers and want to become stars. though krish is more ambitious than raksha, it is raksha who succeeds first and becomes a rage. their marriage totters.
the fourth love story is that of hrithik mittal (jimmy shergill) and jojo (hrishitaa bhatt). even though hrithik is a multi-millionaire and both the families want them married, jojo refuses to marry him until he gets a job and becomes independent of his father.


== cast ==


== production ==
featuring an ensemble cast of actors, dil vil pyar vyar was revealed to be india's first retro-musical film and featured fourteen songs of the late music director, r. d. burman, which formed the main crux of the plot. the producer, vivek vaswani, had earlier made sar aankhon par as a tribute to actor raj kapoor and revealed that dil vil pyar vyar, would be followed by a third tribute film for actress fearless nadia. the film was shot in late 2001 across mumbai, with r. madhavan working on his portions from december 2001. namrata shirodkar replaced mahima chaudhry in the film's cast and was paired opposite madhavan.


== release ==
the film opened to positive reviews, with a critic from rediff.com adding "it is the manner in which the filmmaker has infused these ordinary stories with passion and poignancy that sets dil vil pyar vyar apart from every other hindi movie. similarly, planet bollywood's critics noted that "the idea of dil vil pyar vyar has been implemented in a workable (and more importantly, watchable) manner and shows that talent and creativity still exists in our oft-inspired industry". despite earning good reviews, the film did not perform well at the box office. this film was later dubbed and released into tamil as kettavarellam padalam (2005).


== soundtrack ==
this movie contains several re-arranged hit songs of r.d. burman sung by singers like kavita krishnamurthy, hariharan, kumar sanu,  abhijeet bhattacharya,  alka yagnik, sadhna sargam, sunidhi chauhan, babul supriyo, and shaan. the re-arrangement was done by babloo chakravorty. 
all music is composed by babloo chakravorty.


== references ==


== external links ==
dil vil pyar vyar at imdb