dil chahta hai (transl.desires of the heart) is a 2001 indian hindi-language coming-of-age romantic comedy film written and directed by farhan akhtar and produced by ritesh sidhwani under the banner of excel entertainment in their cinematic debut. inspired from william shakespeare's 1600 comedy much ado about nothing, the film focuses on a major period of transition in the romantic lives of three college-graduate friends (aamir khan, saif ali khan, and akshaye khanna). it also features preity zinta, sonali kulkarni, and dimple kapadia in the lead roles.
dil chahta hai premiered on 10 august 2001. the film performed moderately at the box office; it was well-received by the audience in the big cities but failed in the rural areas, which was attributed to the city-oriented lifestyle it presented. critically, however, the film garnered positive reviews, with some of whom believing that it broke new ground by introducing a realistic portrayal of indian youth. upon release, dil chahta hai has received several accolades, including two national film awards and seven filmfare awards. the latter includes trophies for best film  critics, best supporting actor (khanna), and best performance in a comic role (saif ali khan).


== plot ==
akash, sameer and siddharth have just graduated from college and take a trip to goa to celebrate. at a scenic spot by the sea, they relax and vow to return there every year. only sid is skeptical that they will remain friends once life takes over. on their return, sameer is arranged by his parents to marry pooja, his parents' friends' daughter, while akash's parents ask him to manage the family business in sydney. around the same time, sid meets a new neighbour, tara, who lives alone and whom he helps to move.
soon, two of the friends have fallen in love: sameer with pooja and sid with tara. on her birthday, tara is distressed by a call from her ex-husband, so sid takes her out to celebrate with akash and sameer. after dropping her on the way back, he tells his friends that he is in love with her. akash makes a disparaging remark about tara's age causing sid to slap him. akash and sameer are both shocked, and the former leaves the night with anger.
sid leaves the town and akash departs for sydney. on the flight, he runs into shalini, a one-time acquaintance from college who agrees to show him around sydney while there. meanwhile, sameer waits for pooja to dump her much-disciplined boyfriend subodh, and eventually asks her out. sid has lesser lucktara walks in on him telling his mother about his feelings, and does not wish to talk with him for believing a relationship between them is possible. in sydney, akash is having a change of heart by falling in love with shalini. shalini, however, is engaged and returns to india to marry rohit. the heartbroken akash is asked to return home by his father. encouraged by those around him and shalini's uncle mahesh, he goes to talk to shalini on the eve of her wedding and proposes to her. shalini is conflicted by loyalty to rohit's parents, who raised her after her parents' death, but they ask her to listen to her heart and marry akash instead.
in the present day, sid finds tara in an advanced stage of cirrhosis. he rushes to the hospital, but she passes away while still talking to him. sid is devastated, but the night gave him the chance to reunite with sameer and reconcile with akash. six months later, the friends return to goa as promised, this time accompanied by shalini and pooja. at their picnic spot from earlier, sid sees a woman in the distance who smiles at him. he approaches her and the film ends with the three couple enjoying dinner together at a restaurant.


== cast ==
credits adapted from bollywood hungama:


== production ==


=== development ===
the film was based on farhan akhtar's diary he wrote during his trips to goa and his month-and-a-half long stay in new york city in 1996, as well as a narration of a story by a friend of his. he originally conceived a story about the romantic relationship between akash and his girlfriend shalini, and later shared it to his parents (javed akhtar and honey irani), who immediately liked his idea but suggested for several changes. however, he felt the story was not exciting and unusual enough for him, and started to develop other characters, including akash's friends, making his initial idea become the film's subplot. he was quoted as saying that:

"i always wondered what happens to the best friends of the hero after reel number three. where do they go? when he needs them the most, they are never there. and so at some time the weight of the story shifted from aamir [khan]'s love story with preity [zinta] to becoming a story about the friendships and how individual love stories affect the friendships."
while co-directing music videos for shankar mahadevan's album breathless (1998) with his sister zoya akhtar, farhan akhtar began writing the film's screenplay under the working title of hum teen in 1998, but finished it after the principal photography was already commenced in 2000when it was retitled dil chahta hai. the dialogue was originally written by him in english, and he translated it to hindi in two months. this would mark his cinematic debut along with his friend ritesh sidhwani, who produced it under their banner of excel entertainment. several elements of the film were inspired from the english playwright william shakespeare's much ado about nothing.


=== casting ===

aamir khan, saif ali khan, akshaye khanna, preity zinta, sonali kulkarni, and dimple kapadia were chosen as the leads. aamir khan, playing akash, described his character as a typical man of present-day india. according to him, he accepted to star in the film after he read the film's screenplay, which he noted for its freshness. he said, "he is to a great extent self-centered, doesn't believe in love and doesn't indulge in emotions. in that sense he is quite shallow but not really a bad guy at heart." he was also offered to portray sid, but he did not want to change his mind because he believed that he had play several roles of the same type. he admitted he really liked the akash role, calling it was "something [he] never done before". in preparation, aamir khan, 34, changed his style to a 24-year-old man in a period of two months.saif ali khan was cast as sameer, a part he found "funny and charming" and resembles his personality. particularly drawn to the qualities of his role, he described the film as a "learning experience". initially, he did not want to star in the film but kapadia and javed akhtar persuaded him to do so. after aamir khan rejected sid, khanna came to replace him. having feature in a number of commercially and critically failed film and take a hiatus of two years, the press labelled this project as his comeback film. in an interview to rediff.com, khanna said that dil chahta hai has an unique concept and his interest to its script made him signed on the film. the role of sid gave him "a very new sound, a new look and a very young feel" as well as image of himself. aamir khan spoke positively of his rapport with them, confessing that it was his dream to collaborate with the two.zinta also decided to accept the offer for starring in the film after reading its screenplay, which she referred as "fabulous". prior to the film, she and farhan akhtar had been friends for a long time and promised to do a film together. she performed a screen test at his house and was cast for the role of shalini, aamir khan's love interest, spending three-and-a-half months in preparation. while kulkarni got the part as sameer's fiance pooja, kapadia was chosen for the role of the middle-aged alcoholic interior designer and divorce tara and, according to rediff.com, it was the first time she played the love interest of a much-younger man. kapadia told filmfare that making the film was an enriching experience, and called her part "a role to die for". in the interview, she said the role was "very dark" as the character was died at the end of the film, which she did not like, and she felt that it has no "sunshine except this little bond that she forms with" khanna. considering her as the film's "surprise package", farhan akhtar did not want to feature her in any trailers and music videos of dil chahta hai aired on televisions because he wanted to astonish the audience. the casting was done by zoya akhtar.


== soundtrack ==

all lyrics are written by javed akhtar; all music is composed by shankarehsaanloy.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
the film was well received by critics, for farhan akhtar's direction, saif ali khan's performance, and portraying contemporary indian youth as cosmopolitan and urban. the characters are depicted as upper-class with lavish houses and designer clothes. they attend art exhibitions and performances of western opera, and travel overseas as a matter of course. some critics opined that dil chahta hai did not perform well in the non-urban areas because the lifestyle depicted was too city-oriented.beth watkins of the wall street journal wrote, "the mix of humour, emotion, sincerity and wisdom makes "dil chahta hai" a truly enduring film." sita menon of rediff.com concluded that the film was "slick and witty", and piroj wadia of  screen called the film "an amazing debut" and praised its script, direction, music, and performances. dinesh raheja of india today wrote: "dch has a refreshingly wicked sense of humour, and is a comparatively-rare generation x movie. hold on  young love in hindi cinema seems to have finally come of age  or at least is on the way."dil chahta hai was screened at the international film festival of india, the palm springs international film festival and the austin film festival.


== accolades ==


== references ==


== external links ==
dil chahta hai at imdb
dil chahta hai at allmovie
dil chahta hai at rotten tomatoes
bonobology.com: "6 bollywood movies where the lead characters have had a huge age difference"