doctor syn is a 1937 british black-and-white historical dramatic adventure film, directed by roy william neill for gainsborough pictures. it stars george arliss (in his last feature film), margaret lockwood, graham moffatt and ronald shiner. the film is based on the doctor syn novels of russell thorndike, set in 18th century kent. the character of syn and the events at the film's climax were both softened considerably in comparison to thorndike's original story.


== plot ==
led by captain collyer (roy emerton), a detachment of royal navy tax and revenue officers arrive in the village of dymchurch on romney marsh. the area is notorious for liquor-smuggling and they are on the trail of the culprits. they find a village of apparently honest, pious and simple folk, looked after benevolently by their philanthropic vicar doctor syn (arliss). syn is in fact the leader of the smugglers of the parish, using his cover as a man of the cloth to run a profitable ring whose dividends are used to better the lives of the local community. collyer gradually comes to suspect what is going on, and a series of chases and confrontations takes place across the marshes, in which syn and the smugglers always narrowly outwit their pursuers. collyer finally discovers that syn is none other than the notorious pirate captain clegg, thought to have been executed many years earlier. still one step ahead, syn destroys all incriminating evidence and he and his men make their escape.


== cast ==


== production ==
it was the last film george arliss made under his contract with gaumont british. "he is a quite good parson and there is virtue even in his smuggling", said arliss.  "i think we can make him quite an amusing character, and the subject is picturesque and dramatic."the film was announced in april, taking place at gaumont british's studio at islington. there was some location work in dymchurch  and the marshes around rye and winchelsea.anna lee was to play the female lead. she was replaced by margaret lockwood who impressed with her performance so much she was offered a three-year contract by gainsborough pictures. this was a key turning point in lockwood's career.


== music ==
there are two songs in the film:

heavenly home (hymn sung by congregation in the opening church scene)
come landlord fill the flowing bowl (traditional drinking song)


== references ==


== external links ==
doctor syn at allmovie
the template bfidb title is being considered for deletion. doctor syn at the british film institute's film and tv database
doctor syn at britmovie (archived)
doctor syn at imdb
dr syn at tcmdb