doctor detroit is a 1983 american comedy film directed by michael pressman with writing by bruce jay friedman, carl gottlieb, and robert boris. the film stars dan aykroyd, howard hesseman, lynn whitfield, fran drescher, and donna dixon, with a special appearance by james brown. it was the first movie aykroyd made after the death of john belushi and the first one in which hes not sharing top bill with other actors. aykroyd and his co-star dixon married soon after the film's release.


== plot ==
introverted geek clifford skridlow (dan aykroyd) is a professor of comparative literature at the financially strapped (fictional) monroe college in chicago.
smooth walker (howard hesseman), a pimp, owes $80,000 to "mom" (kate murtagh), a gruff chicago mob boss. attempting to weasel out of his debt, smooth invents a fictitious mobster, the flamboyant "doctor detroit", a ruthless chiropractor who allegedly is overrunning smooth's turf. clifford meets smooth and his girls monica (donna dixon), jasmine (lydia lei), karen (fran drescher), and thelma (lynn whitfield), and has the best night of his life partying with them. the next morning, during a faculty meeting, clifford learns about their troubles with mom, that smooth has skipped town, and that according to smooth, they are now clifford's girls. clifford agrees to assume the persona of doctor detroit in an effort to help them out of their jam.
meanwhile, monroe college anticipates a corporate endowment from rousehorn consolidated industries to be presented by its ceo, harmon rousehorn (andrew duggan). if the contribution is large enough, it will allow the college to remain open.
while clifford is teaching classes, grading papers, catering a faculty party and assisting in hosting the visiting ceo, his doctor detroit alter ego has to find a way to get thelma out of a solicitation charge, hold mom at bay, and appear at the players ball to be proclaimed the new king of the pimps while simultaneously appearing at monroe college's annual alumni dinner. when mom shows up at the players ball, she figures out that doctor detroit and professor skridlow are one and the same, and duels him with sword-length kebab skewers in front of the assembled academics. following the defeat of mom, the two functions combine into one joyous, spectacular party, as the ultimate fates of the characters are revealed, ending with the reveal that clifford married karen.


== cast ==
dan aykroyd as clifford skridlow/doctor detroit
howard hesseman as smooth walker
fran drescher as karen blittstein
donna dixon as monica mcneil
lydia lei as jasmine wu
t. k. carter as diavolo washington
lynn whitfield as thelma cleland
kate murtagh as mom
george furth as arthur skridlow
nan martin as margaret skridlow
peter aykroyd as mr. frankman
glenne headly as miss debbylike
robert cornthwaite as professor blount
parley baer as judge robert e. lee davis-jackson
john kapelos as rush street dude
james brown as bandleader (himself)
steven williams as junior sweet
andrew duggan as harmon rausehorn
blackie dammett as eddie four eyes
cacey kustosz as the streaker


== filming ==
the film was shot on location in chicago and evanston, illinois, as well as at the university of southern california and biltmore hotel in los angeles, california, during the summer of 1982.


== soundtrack ==
james brown makes a cameo appearance in the film, performing "get up offa that thing/dr. detroit." devo performed the "theme from doctor detroit," which plays over the opening credits, as well as "luv-luv," and released an ep including both tracks and a longer dance remix of the theme song. a music video was also produced for the theme song, incorporating footage from the film.
a soundtrack album for the film was released on the labels backstreet, mca and wea.


=== track listing ===


== reception ==
the film received generally negative reviews from critics. writing in the chicago tribune, critic gene siskel gave the film two and a half stars and called it "a mess, but a genial mess." roger ebert gave it three stars, saying it had "just a humble little screenplay" but also "a lot of funny moments" and a performance by dan aykroyd that showed "a lot of invention." review aggregator rotten tomatoes reports that 33% of six critics have given the film a positive review.in her autobiography, enter whining, fran drescher commented that doctor detroit was expected to be a major hit for the summer of 1983 but fell short of expectations, grossing $10.8 million on a budget of $8 million. despite this, doctor detroit has developed a cult following over the years.


== see also ==
list of american films of 1983


== references ==


== external links ==
doctor detroit at imdb
doctor detroit at allmovie
doctor detroit at box office mojo
doctor detroit at rotten tomatoes