doli saja ke rakhna (transl.keep the palanquin decorated and ready) is a 1998 indian hindi-language romance film directed by priyadarshan, with akshaye khanna and jyothika  in lead roles. the plot is adapted from the malayalam film aniyathipraavu. the music was composed by a. r. rahman. this was jyothika's debut film.


== plot ==
inder moves to a new town to pursue his higher studies, in spite of the pressure from his parents to marry and settle down. there, he accidentally meets a beautiful, yet shy girl pallavi. he instantly falls in love with her, even when her identity remains unknown. when an opportunity presents itself, his friends convince him to talk to her, while she tries to avoid the conversation. this is seen by her brother, who mistakes him as a stalker and so do her two other brothers; who thrash and leave him with a warning. mini is the apple of the eye of her family. she lives with her mother and three elder brothers.
. they are overprotective of her and she does not do anything against their wisheinderdhi's family is not that different, except him being the only son. the thought pallaviini now burdeinderdhi's mind and he sets out to find out how she feels about him. he asks her to give him an answer, even if it is a npallaviini on the other hand, is unable to take a decision  further aggravating the situation. whpallavi'si's brothey finds out thinderdhi is still after her, he turns furious and beats him up, warning him to back oupallaviini, now realizing that she had always loved him, feels that her timidity worsened the situation. she confesses her feelings inderdhi and they kindle their relationship. they firmly believe that their families will agree to their relationship, if not immediately. within dapallavi'skbrother ey sees them together, whiinderdhi is chasipallaviini playfully. he mistakes it to be an attempt to assault her and tries to brutally attack hipallaviini with her newfound courage stohimkey, openly declaring her love for him, shatterihimkey. the news devastates her family as well, leading them to reject her as a part of their family. the grief leads them to take revenge on the one that caused them the pain. they search finderdhi, forcing the desolate couple to eloppallaviini's brothers search finderdhi in his family home, while verbally abusing his parents, shocking them with the newinderdhi's parents are convinced that the girl is no good for their son, considering the behavior of her brothers. when the couple arrive at sudhi's house, they are not welcomed there. with their beliefs broken and without a place to go to, one of the two close friends inderdn) takes them home to his smang village. they are welcomed by his fathet) who is the leader of the village and the villagers. her brothers trace them to the village that evening and are met with resistance from the villagers. they return and the villagers plan to get the couple legally married the next morning.
pallavi and inder, now seeing the situation that they put their families in, and the sorrow that they have brought upon themselves and their families; decide to back out from the relationship and return to their families. they realize that the best thing they can do to prove their love, is to go back to their families. although initially insulted with their decision to separate, the village leader appreciates their choice once he understands their reason. their families, on seeing them return, forgive them right away and accept them back.
both the families now feel indebted to their children and recognize their pain they try so hard to hide. they search for better matches for them both and pallavi's marriage is arranged. inder finds with him a necklace belonging to pallavi. his parents decide to go along with him to return the necklace, partially due to inder's mother's wish to meet pallavi. both the families apologize for the happenings earlier and inder apologizes to pallavi's mother. the situation being depressing, they decide to leave early, but inder's mother breaks into tears and requests to get mini married to her son. everyone, having felt the same way, agree on their marriage and apologize to their children, for the pain that they put them through.


== cast ==


== reception ==
anish khanna of planet bollywood gave the film 8.5 out of 10. faisal shariff of rediff wrote, "the film plays on traditional family values, and that isn't very convincing. and the way it was carried off could have been a trifle subtler, we thought." the film was commercially unsuccessful.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack for the film was composed by a. r. rahman, who worked with priyadarshan in his previous film kabhi na kabhi to spawn a critically acclaimed soundtrack. the lyrics were written by mehboob. rahman reused most of the songs in the 1999 tamil film jodi. the producers of jodi's 2007 kannada remake sajni, bought the rights of the songs and used it in the film. the video clip of the song "kissa hum likhenge" was made in the greek islands mykonos and melos.


== references ==


== external links ==
doli saja ke rakhna at imdb