don  is a 2007 indian telugu-language action film produced by m.l. kumar chowdary on sri keerthi creations banner and directed by raghava lawrence, starring himself along with akkineni nagarjuna and anushka shetty, while nikita thukral and kelly dorji play supporting roles. raghava lawrence made his debut as music director for the film. don released on 20 december 2007 and film was remade in bangladesh as don number one and into odia as with same name starring anubhav mohanty.


== plot ==
the story begins when a teen named suri escapes and finds a drug dealer tormenting some little boys. suri guns down the drug dealer. one of the boys, raghava, expresses his wish to join him. the rest of the boys become suri's helpers and eventually his henchmen.
the film continues 20 years later with suri (akkineni nagarjuna) and raghava (raghava lawrence), and with the establishment of the fact that suri is the don with a golden heart. then, he has raghava as his sidekick who adores him to death. together, they rule the underworld of andhra pradesh. since suri is the unopposed kingpin, he has time for a song and dance on his birthday with his basti people.
everything is peaceful and hunky dory, but only until stephen (kelly dorji) enters the scene. he is a feared don throughout india who wants to add andhra to his underworld fieldom. he has two concubines for himself. before andhra's conquer plan, he challenges goa don on a fight while his wife is tearfully seeing her husband being killed brutally. lustful stephen makes her his indian concubine for bed. suri refuses to work with stephen. in many attempts to kill suri, stephen's men get killed. rathnam (kota srinivasa rao) wants to kill raghava. raghava kills rathnam because the latter had hosted a hideout for stephen's in hyderabad
meanwhile, suri falls in love with priya (anushka shetty). at first, she does not like him but later begins to. raghava also finds a girl that he likes. in that process, he is cornered, where his fianc nandhini (nikita thukral) ends up being on the villains side. raghava is killed.
in a final meet between suri and stephen, the latter returns raghava's bullet-ridden body and challenges suri to a fight on the condition that "a person will lose two of his men for each fall he takes". angered and heartbroken by raghava's death, suri accepts his challenge. as the fight progresses, suri loses two of his men. determined to win, suri continues the fight and thrashes up stephen and his two well-trained women bodyguards.
the fight ends with stephen getting killed by suri, and suri warns stephen's remaining men not to be like their boss and finally suri becomes the unopposed don of india.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by raghava lawrence. music released on aditya music company.


== references ==


== external links ==
don at imdb