don't bet on blondes is a 1935 american romantic comedy film.


== plot summary ==
when top broadway bookmaker odds owen (warren william) loses $50,000 on a horse owned by everett markham (clay clement), he investigates and finds out that the horse was doped.  owen visits everett and lets him know that everett will be selling his horses and paying back the $50,000.
owen is inspired by hearing about lloyds of london.  he decides to go into the business of underwriting unusual insurance policies.
everett is a friend to actress marilyn youngblood (claire dodd).  marilyn supports her neer do well father, colonel youngblood (guy kibbee), and she is dating rich playboy dwight board (walter byron) who is also a hypochondriac.   everett convinces marilyns father to take out a 3-year insurance policy against marilyn getting married.  if she gets married within three years, her father gets 50,000.  owen agrees to insure the policy.
owens men get rid of dwight by convincing him that marriage could kill someone with a weak heart.
marilyn starts seeing david van dusen (errol flynn).  owens men go to the restaurant where marilyn and van dusen are eating and pretend to be shady characters who know van dusen.  one of them walks by and hands van dusen an envelope with money.  another hands him a gun wrapped in a handkerchief.  marilyn, convinced he is a gangster, breaks up with him.
marilyn notices owen nearby and remarks on how strange it is to see him again when she is breaking up with someone. owen is attracted to marilyn and starting starts dating her, ostensibly to keep her from dating anyone else.
marilyns father tells her about the insurance policy.  she decides to make owen fall for her and he does.  to get back at owen, marilyn becomes engaged to everett.  now everett will have his revenge.  owen will lose $50,000 and marilyn.  owen tells everett he wont welch but he doesnt think everett will marry marilyn.  owen has fallen in love with her, placing him in a dilemma, caught between the heart and the wallet.
marilyns father begs owen to stop the wedding.  marilyn, at the church, is hoping the same thing.  everett doesnt show up for the wedding.  owen appears in his place and marilyn happily marries him.  owens men pay off dozens of cabbies who have caused a traffic jam which prevented everett from getting to the church.


== cast ==


== production ==
the film was originally known as not on your life and was always intended as a vehicle for warren william. dolores del ro was originally announced as female co star. she was eventually replaced by claire dodd. walter byron replaced george meeker. filming completed 13 may 1935.errol flynn appears briefly playing a bit part in his fifth movie, and second in hollywood, just before his break-through role in captain blood later that year. he made the movie shortly after his marriage to lili damita.


== reception ==
the los angeles times called it a "sparkling comedy" in which warren william "again proves himself a delightful and suave comedian."filmink magazine said the main faults of the film were "the wonky structure, williams flat performance, and the lack of chemistry between william and dodd. its kind of a shame that flynn didnt get the chance to play the lead, as he would have been a lot better, even at that stage of his career."


== references ==


== external links ==
don't bet on blondes at imdb