drive, she said is a 1997 canadian film by mina shum, starring moira kelly, sebastian spence and josh hamilton.


== plot summary ==
nadine (moira kelly), a bank teller, is taken hostage by tass (josh hamilton), who has robbed the bank to pay for medical care for his ailing mother. the film focuses on the developing relationship between nadine and tass, and nadine's changing views in relation to her conventional life and relationships. the police and nadine's longtime boyfriend, fellow bank employee jonathan (sebastian spence) search for and successfully find her, though also find that she has been permanently affected by her time with tass.


== critical reception ==
the film was shum's second film, after her well-received 1994 film, double happiness, which starred sandra oh. drive, she said received mixed reviews.  writing in variety, derek elley described the film as "a meet-cute road movie that starts in high gear but soon takes too many left turns for its own good. mina shums second feature, after her well-remarked, chinese-themed low-budgeter 'double happiness' is too mild a confection to motor on to much theatrical business."


== release history ==
the film, produced by stephen hegyes had a limited release. it premiered at the toronto international film festival in 1997, where audience reaction was positive, but did not generate firm distribution interest.    it was then shown at the popcorn festival in sweden, in 1998.  also in 1998, the film was invited to the competition section of the delle donne international film festival, in turin, italy.


== cast ==
moira kelly  ... nadine ship
sebastian spence  ... jonathan evans
josh hamilton  ... tass richards
jim byrnes  ... dr. glen green
lori ann triolo  ... jo (as lori triolo)
peter stebbings  ... detective eddie
david hurtubise  ... ben polstein
hiromoto ida  ... sloan
mina shum  ... chen
john b. destry  ... bob the guard (as john destry)
hrothgar mathews  ... ernie
carrie cain-sparks  ... the waitress (as carrie cain sparks)
mike crestejo  ... bike cop
amanda leary  ... bank heistess
allan franz  ... medic
tom scholte  ... arnold the gas guy
tom shorthouse  ... kindly older gent
tong lung  ... counter person
alex diakun  ... the prophecy
carla stewart  ... mrs. richards
harry kalinski  ... merlin the driver (as harry kalensky)
micki maunsell  ... cranky lady


== references ==