drugstore cowboy is a 1989 american crime drama film directed by the american filmmaker gus van sant. written by van sant and daniel yost, and based on an autobiographical novel by james fogle, the film stars matt dillon, kelly lynch, heather graham and william s. burroughs. it was van sant's second film as director.
at the time the film was made, the source novel by fogle was unpublished. it was later published in 1990, by which time fogle had been released from prison. fogle, like the characters in his story, was a long-time drug user and dealer.
the film was a critical success and currently holds a 100% rating at rotten tomatoes, with an average score of 8/10 based on 27 reviews.


== plot ==
in 1971, 26-year-old bob hughes leads a nomadic group of drug addictshis wife dianne, his best friend rick, and rick's teenage girlfriend nadinewho travel across the pacific northwest robbing pharmacies and hospitals to support their habits.
after stealing from a portland, oregon, pharmacy, they drive home to get high, and are visited by david, a local low-life seeking hard-to-find dilaudid. bob claims they have none but offers to trade him morphine for speed. initially reluctant, david is persuaded to trade and leaves. later, police officers led by detective gentry, who correctly assumes the group is responsible for the pharmacy robbery, raid and wreck the apartment in an unsuccessful search for the stolen drugs, which dianne has buried outside.
after moving to another apartment, bob realizes that gentry has the group under surveillance. bob then plots an elaborate deception which results in one of the policemen, trousinski, being mistaken for a peeper by a neighbor who shoots and injures him. the next day, a furious gentry assaults bob. believing a hex has been brought upon them, the group goes "crossroading", and robs a drugstore via an open transom. they find their haul includes vials of pure powdered dilaudid worth thousands of dollars each. bob, declaring, "when you're hot, you're hot," convinces dianne that he should rob a hospital.
during the robbery, bob is almost captured and the group returns to their motel to find nadine has fatally overdosed on a stolen bottle of dilaudid. she has also put "the worst of all hexes" on them by leaving a hat on the bed. after temporarily storing nadine's body in the motel's attic, they are alerted by the motel manager that their room was previously booked for a sheriff convention and they must check out. bob, suffering tremendous anxiety and stress-induced visions of handcuffs and prison, sneaks the body out of the motel in a garment bag. before burying nadine in a forest, bob tells dianne that he is going to get clean and begin a 21-day methadone treatment program. shocked by bob's decision, dianne refuses to join him.
bob moves into a long-stay motel in portland and gets a low-level manufacturing job. at the methadone clinic, he encounters an elderly, drug-addicted priest named tom, whom bob remembers from his childhood days as an altar boy. gentry pays a visit to the motel and says that trousinski has been making threats against bob, whom gentry encourages to stay sober. bob later runs into david, who is bullying a kid who supposedly owes david money. bob stops david and lets the kid escape, much to david's frustration.
one night, dianne arrives at the motel and reveals that she is now in a relationship with rick, the groups new leader. dianne asks bob what happened on the road to make him change his life, and he answers that nadine's death, the hex she put on them, and the possibility of serious prison time contributed to his decision. he reveals a deal he made with a higher power: if he could get nadine's body out of the motel, past the cops, and into the ground, he would straighten out his life. bob suggests dianne stay the night with him, but she declines, and gives bob a package of drugs before leaving. bob gives the drugs to tom (who rejects all of them except for a bottle of dilaudid). returning to his room, bob is attacked by two masked figures, one of whom is david, who think he has drugs. bob tells them that he is clean, but david does not believe this and shoots him. a neighbor phones for help, and bob is loaded onto an ambulance. asked who shot him, bob tells gentry it was "the hat."
whilst riding in the ambulance, bob concludes in a voiceover that he has "paid his debt to the hat" and so can resort to his former lifestyle without breaking his commitment. he is amused by the perceived irony of the police driving him to a hospital  "the fattest pharmacy in town."


== cast ==
matt dillon as robert "bob" hughes
kelly lynch as dianne hughes
james legros as rick
heather graham as nadine
max perlich as david
james remar as gentry
grace zabriskie as mrs. hughes
william s. burroughs as father tom murphy


== production ==
tom waits was van sant's first choice to play the lead although the finance company would not support van sant if he had cast him. officially the reason given was that waits was appearing in another movie they were financing although van sant has said he suspected the oscar win of kiss of the spider woman, a film they had also financed, had made them want a lead who could win an oscar.


=== filming locations ===
drugstore cowboy was filmed mainly around portland, oregon, including in an area in the pearl district that used to be a railyard, with a viaduct going over it. the lovejoy columns, which formerly held up the viaduct and feature outsider artwork, are featured in the movie. the initial drugstore scene was filmed at the nob hill pharmacy on nw glisan street.


== music ==
the soundtrack includes songs that are contemporaneous with the film's setting, along with original music by elliot goldenthal. it is one of his earliest works; in it he does not use an orchestra but a whole range of instruments treated in a synthesizer. the score and soundtrack were also the first that goldenthal worked on with richard martinez, a music producer whose "computer expertise and sound production assistance" became the basis for frequent subsequent collaborations. allmusic rated this soundtrack three stars out of five.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
the film was very well received critically and is listed on the top ten lists of both gene siskel and roger ebert, for films released in 1989. it holds a rare 100% rating at rotten tomatoes, with an average score of 8/10 based on 28 reviews. the site's consensus reads: "drugstore cowboy takes us into a violent, transient world with cool, contemplative style". review aggregator metacritic assigned the film a weighted average score of 82 based on 15 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim".


=== accolades ===
drugstore cowboy won the following awards:

l.a. film critics association (1989)  best screenplay (dan yost, gus van sant)
national society of film critics (1989)  best film, best director
independent spirit award (1989)  best male lead (matt dillon), best cinematography, best screenplay, best supporting male (max perlich)
new york film critics circle (1989)  best screenplay


== see also ==
list of films with a 100% rating on rotten tomatoes


== references ==


== external links ==
drugstore cowboy at imdb
drugstore cowboy at allmovie
drugstore cowboy at rotten tomatoes
drugstore cowboy filming locations at miskowiec.com