dubai seenu  is a 2007 indian telugu-language action comedy film starring ravi teja in the lead role and nayantara as his love interest. the film is directed by srinu vaitla in his third collaboration with ravi teja after nee kosam and venky. dvv danayya produced this film after the box office success of his maiden film, desamuduru. it was remade in kannada as dubai babu with upendra in lead role. a tamil dubbed version titled dubai rani was released in chennai on 29 july 2016.


== plot ==
srinivas (ravi teja) is popular in his village as dubai seenu. he of seeking his fortune in dubai. seenu and his friends reach mumbai but unfortunately get cheated by a fraudster tataji (venu madhav). after realizing that they were cheated, the friends start a pav bhaji center with the help of patnaik (krishna bhagavaan), who is also a fraudster.
madhumati (nayantara), who was working as an rj, goes to mumbai in search of her brother. seenu meets madhu in a local train and loses his heart. luckily, she surfaces right before his pav bhaji center. seenu dares to propose his love, but madhu does not reply and disappears. while seenu was in search of madhu, he meets chakri (j. d. chakravarthy). in fact, seenu helps chakri, who loved puja (neha bamb), and got them married. chakri and puja promise seenu to help him to go to dubai. they make all arrangements. they, too, plan to return to hyderabad to repay the loan borrowed by chakri's father for his education. just before leaving the office, chakri and puja find that their boss is none other than jinnah bhai (sushant singh) the most wanted mafia don in india.
finding that the couple recognised him, jinnah and his brother  kill chakri and puja right before seenu. minutes before his death, chakri reveals that madhu was his sister. seenu returns to hyderabad, where he meets madhu and pays off her debt. when she asks how he got the money, he reveals that it is her brother's money. madhu's uncle babji (sayaji shinde) also wants to marry her. in the end, seenu kills jinnah and his people and marries madhu.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music was scored by manisharma.


== critical reception ==
the film was well received by both audience and critics. the hindu wrote "yes, there are blemishes in the screenplay but in a movie like this, one is really not supposed to bother about them as logic (dubai seenu never visits dubai) is never the motive!". idlebrain wrote "on a while its a time pass film if you are looking for ravi teja kind of comedy".


== box-office performance ==
the movie has earned 107.3 million rupees in its opening week and 158.9 million rupees by the end of the second week, giving a strong competition with sivaji (2007), a rajinikanth starrer. considering its low budget of rs. 9 crores into concern it was declared a super hit. it has brought ravi teja, depressed about the failure of khatarnak, into wonderful joy which was released with nearly 250 prints.


== references ==


== external links ==
dubai seenu at imdb