dulhan hum le jayenge (transl.i will take the bride) is a 2000 indian hindi-language romantic comedy film starring salman khan and karisma kapoor. dulhan hum le jayenge was directed by david dhawan and was the fifth highest-grossing bollywood film of 2000.
the film was inspired by bhappi sonie's 1960 film ek phool char kaante.


== plot ==
sapna (karisma kapoor) has been brought up by her three doting, but eccentric uncles. prabhu (paresh rawal) is a very religious hindu, while bhola (om puri) is a former wrestler who is very into fitness and makes sapna do intense workout routines daily. vicky (anupam kher) is into fashion and western music. the uncles all wish for her to marry, but their differences clash, as each of them wants the boy to have the same interests as them. sapna is tired of dancing to her uncle's tunes all her life and wishes to take a group trip to europe. however, when she expresses her wishes to her nanny, mary (himani shivpuri), her uncles fire the nanny for giving sapna such foolish ideas. however, mary works for another family and tells them of sapna's plight. she shares sapna's photo with raja (salman khan), who is now determined to make her his bride. meanwhile, sapna looks to the last resort and tries to run away, but vicky catches her and volunteers to take her to the airport himself. on her travels through europe, raja creates nothing but trouble for her, but circumstances separate them from the rest of the tour group, and raja saves sapna's life. they fall in love and wish to marry once they return to india, but raja must first impress all three of her uncles. through a series of comic events, raja wins their hearts. he and sapna happily marry in the end.


== cast ==
salman khan as raja oberoi
karisma kapoor as sapna
kader khan as mr. oberoi
satish kaushik as police inspector
johnny lever as tour manager chirkund/chirkunda
om puri as bhola nath
paresh rawal as prabhu nath
anupam kher as vicky nath
deepak tijori as smuggler
kashmira shah as lovely
farida jalal as mrs. oberoi
himani shivpuri as mary
dara singh as sapna's grandfather
rakesh bedi as secretary / photographer
usha bachani as smuggler's girlfriend


== songs ==
according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 18,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's eighth highest-selling.


== references ==


== external links ==
dulhan hum le jayenge at imdb