dj: duvvada jagannadham is a 2017 indian telugu-language action comedy film written and directed by harish shankar and produced by dil raju under his banner sri venkateswara creations. the film stars allu arjun and pooja hegde, while rao ramesh, subbaraju, chandra mohan, and murali sharma play supporting roles. devi sri prasad composed the film's music, while ayananka bose performed the cinematography and chota k. prasad edited the film.
it follows, duvvada jagannatham, an undercover officer is tasked with taking down a real estate crime lord and a corrupt politician. however, he faces many obstacles in his mission and tries to overcome them all.
the film was launched officially in august 2016. principal photography commenced in november 2016 in hyderabad and ended in may 2017. it was shot primarily in hyderabad and abu dhabi. the film released on 23 june 2017, coinciding with ramzan weekend. despite receiving mixed reviews, the film grossed approximately 115.10 crore in its theatrical run.


== plot ==
duvvada jagannadham shastri (allu arjun) is a cook working as a caterer in vijayawada along with his family. he rescues a high-profile cop named purushottam (murali sharma) from the attack of a crime mafia in hyderabad. seeing the quality of a rebellion in the priest and his sharpshooting skill, purushottam trains jagannadham to become dj, an undercover officer who fights crime in the disguise of a brahmin priest. jagannadham falls in love with pooja (pooja hegde) the daughter of a corrupt home minister named pushpam (posani krishna murali) involved with yet another real estate crime lord, royyala naidu (rao ramesh). royyala naidu operates naidu industries and the agro diamond financing company in disguise. on the other hand, dj decides to take on royyala naidu in his mission but does not know who he is in actual life. the rest of the story is about how dj uses royyala naidu's son royyala avinash (subbaraju), who suffers with histrionic personality disorder, and through him, dj destroys royyala naidu's corrupt business empire, thereby rescuing the agro diamond scam victims.


== cast ==


== production ==


=== development ===
after the success of sarrainodu (2016), allu arjun announced that he will be collaborating for a tamil-telugu bilingual directed by n. linguswamy, which was excpected to go on floors. meanwhile in june 2016, he announced that his next film will be directed by harish shankar, and produced by dil raju. the film marks the second collaboration of raju, with arjun after arya (2004) and parugu (2008). while the makers are yet to finalise the cast and crew members, devi sri prasad announced that he will compose music for the film. shruti haasan and kajal aggarwal were approached to play the lead actress, but pooja hegde was eventually finalized for that role. on 28 august 2016, the film makers announced the title of the film as duvvada jagannatham. the film was launched on 29 august 2016, at the office of the production house in hyderabad.


=== filming ===
principal photography of the film was supposed to commence on 20 october 2016. however, the first leg of the shoot began on 4 november 2016. the filming briefly delayed after arjun took a break, to spend some quality time with his wife sneha reddy, who is expecting her second child. the shooting was later resumed in january 2017.
the production crew also chose abu dhabi as a filming location, as they would benefit from the emirate's 30% film production rebate. the film was shot across abu dhabi global market, abu dhabi national exhibition centre, intercontinental hotel, yas links golf club and galleria mall.the film team placed a statue of lord shiva in chennakeshava temple in belur, which was found against the custom and tradition of the temple and was opposed by the temple priests, which led to stall the shoot. the makers planned to shift the shoot to mysore, until the film team obtained permission from the department of history and archaeology for the shoot and resumed it. the film completed the shooting of major action episodes at the aluminum factory in hyderabad on 21 april 2017. on 15 may 2017, it was announced that the principal shoot of the film got wrapped.


== soundtrack ==
the film's music is composed by devi sri prasad, who is collaborating with harish shankar for the second time and with allu arjun for the seventh time. the album consists of five tracks with jonnavittula ramalingeswara rao, sri mani, bhaskarabhatla, sahithi and balaji penning the lyrics.on 3 may 2017, the first single of the film "dj saranam bhaje bhaje" was released through the youtube channel of aditya music, the music label which bought the film's audio rights. the promo of the song "gudilo badilo madilo vodilo" was unveiled on 15 may, and two days later, on 17 may 2017, the full song was released and got wide reception. the film's audio was released on 21 may 2017, at shilpakala vedika in hyderabad.


== release ==
the film's release was originally scheduled for 19 may 2017, but it was postponed to 30 june 2017, due to the delay in the film's production. in april 2017, a new release date was scheduled as 23 june 2017, coinciding with the ramzan weekend. the theatrical rights of the film were sold to 77.3 crore (us$11 million).


== reception ==
sangeetha devi dundoo of the hindu stated "the film could have been much more gripping but for being punctuated with a handful of songs, quite a few high-decibel ones at that. at 156 minutes, dj is bloated and loses its tempo now and then. while some of the dialogues are fun, others make you cringe. in a conversation between allu arjun, posing as a groom, and pooja hegde posing as a bride, she tells him that she wouldnt want to have kids for two years. to this he answers that he doesnt wear socks even on his feet, forget about anywhere else!" hemanth kumar of firstpost gave 2.5 stars rating out of 5 and wrote that "the point is when you try making a new recipe, its not merely enough to have all the right ingredients. youve to know when to switch off the flame. in the end, when you think about this dj, it just gets loud, louder, loudest. thumbs down. but hey, allu arjun still dances like a dream!"srivatsan of india today wrote that "we get the fact that the masala is very important for this genre. but the scenes that are supposed to leave you misty-eyed end up as comic relief. jokes fall flat and the mass action blocks are not enough. at the same time, it's impossible to write off allu arjun. he's effective in bits; especially when the director wants him to dance and send goons into the air. someone said that allu arjun's body is made of rubber and there can't be a better description. the problem with duvvada jagannadham is its half-baked story, which is everything we've seen in allu arjun's films earlier. to keep up with dj's style, duvvada jagannadham is "boring-ah, bore-asya, bore-obiah".


== accolades ==
filmfare awards

best music director - devi sri prasad - nominated


== references ==


== external links ==
dj: duvvada jagannadham at imdb