easy money is a 1948 british satirical film about a modern british tradition, the football pools. it is composed of four tales about the effect a major win has in four different situations in the post-war period. written by muriel and sydney box, based on the play "easy money" written by arnold ridley, and directed by bernard knowles, it was released by gainsborough pictures.


== plot ==
in the first story, a comedy, a content suburban family, headed by jack warner, is turned into an unhappy lot by their reactions to a win on the football pools. when matters reach a point where they are wishing that they had never won the money, the youngest daughter (petula clark) announces that in fact she forgot to post it, and they all regain their previously happy lives. but then it is discovered that it was a previous entry she had forgotten to post and the winning coupon was mailed, and they decide that they have learned a lesson and resolve not to let the money ruin their happiness.
in the second, a mild-mannered clerk (mervyn johns) with a domineering wife wins a large amount but becomes concerned when his wife insists he quit his mundane job. he finds the prospect of having to tell his employer he is resigning so daunting he plots with a friend that he will fake illness as a way of leaving, but it proves so taxing that he suffers a heart attack.
the third is a crime caper involving a part-time coupon checker (dennis price) and his nightclub singer girlfriend (greta gynt) who devise a scheme to embezzle the winning pot.
the final episode, another comedy, concerns a disillusioned double-bass player (edward rigby) who after a large win on the pools discovers he misses his friends in the orchestra he left, so he becomes its benefactor, subject to the condition that the double-bass section is given unusual prominence in the orchestral lineup.


== cast ==
greta gynt as pat parsons
dennis price as joe henty
jack warner as philip stafford
mervyn johns as herbert atkins
marjorie fielding as ruth stafford
yvonne owen as carol stafford
jack watling as dennis stafford
petula clark as jackie stafford
mabel constanduros as grandma stafford
david tomlinson as martin latham
maurice denham as detective-inspector kirby
joan young as agnes watkins
gordon mcleod as cameron
grey blake as wilson
ernest butcher as clerk
bill owen as mr lee
hugh pryse as martin
jack raine as managing director
richard molinas as johnny
edward rigby as edward "teddy" ball
guy rolfe as archie
raymond lovell as mr cyprus
frank cellier as director of orchestra
john blythe as waiter


== reception ==
critics at the time noted the film was faintly reminiscent of the all-star 1932 hollywood release if i had a million. it earned mixed reviews, but proved to be popular with audiences  still reeling from the effects of world war ii  seeking lighthearted entertainment.
the film earned a profit of 2,200.


== references ==

gainsborough melodrama, edited by sue aspinall and robert murphy, published by the british film institute, london, 1983


== external links ==
easy money at imdb
easy money at allmovie