ee thanutha veluppan kalathu (english: in this cold morning) is a 1990 malayalam mystery thriller film, written by padmarajan and directed by joshiy. it stars mammootty, nedumudi venu, lalu alex, suresh gopi, sumalatha, lakshmi and murali.


== plot ==
justice t. vasudev (babu namboothiri) is murdered in his house, and after his death coir (coconut fibre) is pushed into his mouth by the murderer. one of his close friends, businessman kuwait mani (m. g. soman), seemed to be quite upset with this murder. days later, kuwait mani is killed in an intentional car accident. after his death too, coir was inserted in the mouth. police superintendent haridas damodaran ips (mammootty) heads the investigation. he orders his sub-ordinate joy (lalu alex) to collect details of similar murder cases from history. it is found that rosario fernandes (devan), who was found to have poisoned himself to death also had coir in his mouth. the police had not thought this significant, as it was something that a victim might do in his last moments after consuming poison.
the investigation later reveals that all of the victims were college classmates, and the next target is expected to be philip thennalackal george (murali), who is a businessman. investigations lead them to suspect "christy" (suresh gopi), who was the son of rosario fernandes and sreedevi rosario (lakshmi). sreedevi had died bed-ridden owing to a disease. haridas captures further information about christy by meeting sreedevi's father c. k. gopala menon (prathapachandran), that he was behaving abnormally of late and now his whereabouts are unknown. from nurse leeladevi (kaviyoor ponnamma), it was also traced that christy was present in mysterious circumstances when sreedevi died in the hospital. on roughly questioning philip, he reveals that they (vasudev, mani, philip and rosario) all had a longing for sreedevi in their college days, but she didn't bother about them. when an opportunity came, they had gang raped her.
during an event haridas meets the chief guest warrier (nedumudi venu) who is a spiritual leader having devotees all around the world. later, warrier locked in someone in his house and called on hari for help. warrier claimed the stranger tried to kill him and an encounter between hari and the stranger took place in which the stranger narrowly escapes.
police are able to trace and arrest christy on murder charges, and he is returned to the mental asylum he had escaped from. while undergoing treatment there, haridas transfers christy to the police hospital citing better treatment and caring. christy is subjected to narcosynthesis, from it haridas gets that christy has been misled by someone, who is most likely responsible for the crimes. later christy escapes from this hospital which threats haridas' job. philip calls in the police for protection, but haridas doesn't give him. haridas and joey watch philip's home to catch the unknown culprit. it turns out that the perpetrator was warrier, because during college time sreedevi was initially his wife and the trio raped her in front of him. aftermath he was under treatment for mental problems and set off for pilgrimage. when he came back to the city and settled, he saw everyone who hurt him was happy and nothing wrong has happened to them. so he set out himself to dish out justice.


== cast ==
mammootty as sp haridas damodaran i.p.s.
suresh gopi as christopher / christy
sumalatha as lakshmi haridas
nedumudi venu as warrier
lalu alex as inspector joy
murali as philip thennalackal george
devan as rosario fernandez
m. g. soman as kuwait mani
babu namboothiri as justice t. vasudev
chithra as padmam
lakshmi as sreedevi rosario
siddique as haridas's friend
captain raju as dr.sabarinath
jagathy sreekumar as dr. paviyanos vanolikkara
jagannatha varma as i. g.
thesni khan as vasudev's daughter
sukumari as stella aunty(house keeper at rosario's home )
kaviyoor ponnamma as nurse leeladevi
prathapachandran as c. k. gopala menon
k. p. a. c. sunny as d. i. g.
k. p. a. c. azeez as sub inspector
kollam thulasi as balu
thodupuzha vasanthi
valsala menon as mrs. devis
rajan sankaradi as cameo appearance
appa haja as cameo appearance
mukesh as ponnan cameo appearance
ravi vallathol as cameo appearance
thikkurissy sukumaran nair
paravoor bharathan


== box office ==
the film was a sleeper hit.


== external links ==
ee thanutha veluppan kalathu at imdb