eedo rakam aado rakam (transl. this one's a type, that one's another type) is a 2016 telugu-language romantic comedy film, produced by sunkara ramabrahmam on a.k. entertainments banner and directed by g. nageswara reddy. it features vishnu manchu, raj tarun, sonarika bhadoria and hebah patel  while rajendra prasad appears in a crucial supporting role and music composed by sai karthik. the film is based on punjabi film carry on jatta (2012) which was inspired by the malayalam movie chakkikotha chankaran (1989).
the film's music was released on 26 march 2016 in hyderabad. the film released worldwide on 14 april 2016.  this movie was remade in odia as pilata bigidigala.


== plot ==
the film revolves around two friends arjun & ashwin. arjun is the son of a very rich leading lawyer, advocate narayana while ashwin is the son of a police inspector m. koteswara rao.  they both visit their friend kishore's  wedding where they fall for two charming girls neelaveni & supriya  respectively. neelaveni is the sister of gaja while supriya is the sister of dattu, who are popular goons and rivals in the city. neelaveni makes a firm decision to marry only an orphan. so, arjun pretends as an orphan and gains her love. gaja accepts their love and directly couples up them. thereafter, arjun & neelaveni are in search of a rented house and unfortunately, neelaveni rents the upper portion of arjun's house. thereupon, the troubles start, so, arjun forges ashwin as neelaveni's husband before his family members and ashwin as narayana's son to neelaveni. parallelly, dattu also intends to meet ashwin but he wants a rich alliance for his sister. so, ashwin also bluffs as the son of narayana to which arjun also supports and successfully carries out his espousal.
fearing that their secret will be exposed if he and supriya get married in front of the family, ashwin marries supriya in the court. this creates a confusion. as narayana told arjun that he knows about arjun getting married without letting him know about. arjun assumes it as his and neelavami's, whereas naryana referred to ashwin and supriya's. 
supriya comes to know about the whole drama and supports them. things starts to get complicated when one of gaga's henchmen raghu sees arjun with supriya, and tries to tell the truth to neelavani. however ashwin manages to fool him. and sends him to the police station. this is becomes a problem for ashwin, as raghu went to the police station where ashwin's father works and there he sees dattu's henchmen already captured. dattu's henchmen tell inspector koteswara that aswin is not his son but advocate narayan's.
in order to avoid getting caught, ashwin accepted it. this made his father sad and depressed. on the other hand, neelavani gets pregnant with arjun's child so arjun decides to tell her the truth. on the other hand, raghu told gaja about arjun and supriya's marriage and dattu's henchmen told dattu about ashwin being a police inspector's son and both set out to finish arjun and ashwin respectively.
a cat and mouse fight assures between gaja's henchmen and dattu's henchmen. meanwhile, supriya explains everything to koteswara and narayana. later on, gaja and dattu become friends and accept their sister's husbands with their respective families


== cast ==
main castvishnu manchu as arjun
raj tarun as ashwin
sonarika bhadoria as neelaveni
hebah patel as supriyasupporting cast


== soundtrack ==
music composed by sai karthik and think music india holds the audio rights for the film. music was released on 26 march 2016 at taj deccan in hyderabad. vishnu manchu's father, mohan babu, was the chief guest for the event.


== release ==
the film was dubbed in hindi as hyper on 23 february 2018.


== references ==


== external links ==
eedo rakam aado rakam at imdb