ek chalis ki last local (english: last local of 1:40) is a 2007 indian bollywood adventure comedy thriller directed by sanjay khanduri, starring abhay deol opposite neha dhupia in lead roles. the film released on 18 may 2007, and received positive critical response but poor commercial response upon its release. it has been referred to as a cult classic in bollywood cinema.


== plot ==
the story revolves around two people who miss the last local train at 1:40 am at kurla station and how it changes the rest of their lives forever. the protagonist nilesh works in a call center firm cultivated by the men-centric it industry. night shifts, booze,beer parties seem to be occur day-by-day. when nilesh misses his last train from kurla to vikroli, he is rudely shoved off by a police constable who wants to keep the station clean from anti-social elements like him. nowhere to go, he strolls outside for an auto-rickshaw, where he bumps into a beautiful damsel in distress, madhu, also wanting a ride to vikhroli. as it turns out, the rickshaws are on strike due to a bomb blast earlier in the day at ghatkopar. nilesh and madhu are forced to walk to the next rickshaw stand. nilesh stops at a local pub and is unable to resist his temptation to have a drink or two alongside madhu. he meets an old friend, pat, who appears to have earned a lot of money within a year through gambling. knowing his expertise with the cards, pat invites nilesh to join him in the inner chambers to play with the high rollers.  upon some persuasion from madhu, he gives in and gambles.  taking over nilesh's turn, pat loses all the money they have won to an underworld don.  in the meantime, in his search for madhu, nilesh stumbles into the restroom where he finds madhu apparently being forced upon by a local goon. he accidentally kills that local goon. a police encounter specialist with two constables, a religious but notorious south indian don (ponappa) , a gay underworld don and his gang soon get involved.at last,in a twist and turn of events, all die trying to get 2.5 crore bag except nilesh at don's house.starting the adventure with just rs. 70 in his pocket, when he catches the first morning train home 2- hours later at 4:10 am, he has rs. 2.5 crores in his hands and proposes madhu 3 days later on the same railway station and lives happily after.


== cast ==
abhay deol as nilesh rastogi
neha dhupia as madhu/mala
vinay apte as ponnappa
snehal dabi as habiba
ashwin mushran as mr. bajaj
virendra saxena as rafique
atul srivastava as hawaldar tawde
manu rishi as jeetiya (mangesh's hatchman)
nawazuddin siddiqui as ponnappa's brother (druggie in bar)
deepak shirke as mangesh chilkey
ashok samarth as inspector malvankar
amit mistry as patrick
kishor kadam as bhujang
sunita rajwar as chakli
sanatan modi


== soundtrack ==
the album of ek chalis ki last local was composed by call band and lyrics penned by gulzar.
song laree choote became an ovenight sensation and remains a cult classic song in bollywood.

laree choote
laree choote - remix
ek chauka
ek chauka (title version)
akh
akh (dance version)
bheegi bheegi si
panga


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
martin dsouza of glamsham gave the movie 4.5 stars out of 5, concluding that "if you loved bheja fry, you will love this flick. dont be late for a ride on this last local! as for the producers, the cash register has just begun jingling." taran adarsh of bollywood hungama gave the movie 4 stars out of 5, saying that "ek chalis ki last local is a decent fare that stands out for a few individualistic episodes in the narrative. at the box-office, the film caters to the multiplex audience mainly, especially big city multiplexes. business in mumbai multiplexes should be better due to its mumbaiya flavor." ashok nayak of nowrunning gave the movie 3.5 stars out of 5, stating that "ek chalis ki last local has shades of brilliance but 10 to 15 minutes can be easily trimmed off from the movie for better impact. repeating and unnecessary stretching of scenes are repelling."


== sequel ==
a sequel titled gyaraah chalis ki last metro was announced in the early 2010s. it was announced that the film would feature vivek oberoi opposite mallika sherawat in lead roles. in early 2012, it was announced that the idea of an sequel had been slightly changed. the project would still be released with the same cast & crew, however it will not be noted as a sequel to ek chalis ki last local. in october 2012, the film released as kismet love paisa dilli.


== references ==


== external links ==
ek chalis ki last local at imdb