ek ladka ek ladki (translation: a boy and a girl) is a 1992 indian hindi romantic comedy film directed by vijay sadanah, starring salman khan and neelam kothari. the film was released on 19 june 1992. the film is largely a remake of hollywood movie overboard released in 1987.


== plot ==
bhagwati prasad (anupam kher) looks after the vast estate of his deceased brother, assisted by his wife, and brother-in-law, markutey. bhagwati has got into debt and has been embezzling money in order to pay his debtors. his spoiled and rude niece, renu (neelam), who resides in the united states decides to pay them a visit. bhagwati welcomes her and makes her feel at home, but renu is not easily satisfied until she gets a speedboat so that she can be on her own. alerted by her lawyer, she starts to scrutinize recent transactions and finds 1.5  million rupees missing. she asks bhagwati to provide her with an explanation within 2 days. then she gets into her speed boat, only to get involved in an accident, planned by bhagwati, and disappears. she was saved by some of the fishermen nearby and was handed over to the police. police then look for her family members as she suffers from amnesia, due to the accident. after no one shows up for a long time, raja (salman khan) takes advantage of this only to take revenge of an old encounter between them. he proves to the police that renu is his lost wife by telling of a mark on her lower back. raja, makes her realise the pain of a poor person and in this way, they start loving each other. bhagwati is all set to take over the estate when the estate's lawyer gets a court order freezing all the cash, bank, and assets until such time renu is found or her body is located. the months go by, bhagwati hires men to look for renu, and they soon find her and lead him to her. bhagwati finds out that she has lost her memory, and is living with a man named raja (salman khan) and three children. this time, bhagwati will make sure that she will not escape alive, even if it means to kill raja and the three children as well. renu regains her memories after recognizing her uncle (bhagwati). in the end, the police arrive at the scene and arrest bhagwati and his crooks. she realises that raja betrayed her by not telling her the truth. in the end, before leaving for the u.s.a she also realises that the kids and she herself can't stay without each other, and she loves raja too. this forces her to stay back, as she gives them a surprise after she reaches home back before raja and the kids, as they went in search of her at the airport.


== cast ==
salman khan: raja
neelam kothari: renuka /rani
asrani: markutey
tiku talsania: police inspector
javed khan amrohi:police constable
shobha khote: mrs. prasad
anupam kher: bhagwati prasad
subbiraj: lawyer
sumeet pathak: chotu
arun mathur: school principal
mushtaq khan:: school teacher,


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
ek ladka ek ladki at imdb