ek rishtaa: the bond of love (transl. a relationship: the bond of love) is a 2001 indian hindi-language drama film directed by suneel darshan released on 18 may 2001. the film stars amitabh bachchan, akshay kumar, rakhee, juhi chawla, karisma kapoor, mohnish bahl. it was the first film where bachchan and kumar worked together. the film is a family drama where a big family encounters a crisis when disputes take place between the father (bachchan) and the son (kumar). earning over 1 million (us$14,000)


== plot ==
vijay kapoor (amitabh bachchan) is a successful businessman. he lives happily with his wife (raakhee gulzar) and their four children. ajay (akshay kumar), their only son who was studying abroad and has graduated from university, received an academic degree in information technology and came back home now.
rajesh purohit (mohnish bahl) enters the family, and deviously impresses vijay with his efficiency, and his eldest daughter priti (juhi chawla) with his charm, whereas his main goal is to impoverish their family and take over vijay's fortune. soon, vijay approves the marriage of priti and rajesh who becomes a gharjamai. meanwhile, ajay falls in love with nisha (karisma kapoor) and plans to marry her.
vijay convinces ajay to first gain experience in the family business, even though ajay wants to start his own business. however, ideological differences result in disputes between the two. consequently, ajay stands firm in his decision to start his own business. he asks his father for economic assistance. when vijay refuses to do so, ajay lends a loan. when vijay discovers this, he is furious and throws ajay out of the house.
ajay finally marries nisha and they move into their new house. vijay makes rajesh sign a power of attorney, which empowers him. this is how vijay goes bankrupt, and all his fortune goes automatically to rajesh.
as ajay finds out what happened, he gets that rajesh was the one who had incited arguments between the two. ajay tries to get close to his father again, which causes a crisis in his relationship with nisha, who is not pleased with ajay's reunion with his family. ajay and nisha get separated due to consistent arguments between them, and while she finds out that she is pregnant, ajay has already returned home. his mission now is to return his family fortune and his father's faith, as the latter still cannot forgive him their dispute.
vijay and ajay eventually become reconciled, although he is yet to return the fortune. rajesh begins to treat priti badly, and she also comes back home. ajay then decides to return his family fortune violently and forces rajesh to sign another power of attorney which says that the money comes back to the owner. priti, in a letter tells rajesh that she can never forgive him for the atrocities he inflicted on her family and orders him to leave for good. nisha reunites with ajay, and the family finally comes together and lives happily as it used to be before.


== cast ==
amitabh bachchan as vijay kapoor
akshay kumar as ajay kapoor
raakhee gulzar as pratima kapoor
juhi chawla as priti kapoor/priti rajesh purohit
karishma kapoor as nisha thaapar/nisha ajay kapoor
mohnish behl as rajesh purohit
simone singh as priya kapoor
alok nath as jagmohan thappar
shakti kapoor as ladoo mama
ashish vidyarthi as hari singh
sharat saxena as police inspector
avtar gill as khanna
anang desai as brij
kunika as sweety aunty
suniel shetty as himself (cameo appearance)
nagma moraji as herself in the song mulakat


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by nadeem-shravan while lyrics were by sameer. the album was the tenth most sold album of 2001. manish dhamija from planet bollywood gave 7.5 stars stating,   


== release & reception ==


=== critical reception ===
ek rishtaa received a mixed reception from critics.
dharmesh rajput of bbci-films gave it 3.5 out of 5 stars, praising the performance of amitabh bachchan stating, "the real pleasure of this film is amitabh's performance  is it any wonder he was voted best actor at the bbc online millennium polls? this man is good value for money on the big screen". n.k deoshi of apunkachoice.com also gave the film 3.5 out of 5 stars but said "suneel darshan had all the ingredients to make a blockbuster, a celluloid virtuoso like big b, a bevy of willowy beauties karisma, juhi and simone singh and, last but not the least, the khiladi akshay kumar. but despite such an impressive ensemble ek rishta turns out to be quite a disappointing fare". savera r someshwar of rediff.com gave the a negative review calling the screenplay terrible but praised the performances of amitabh, akshay, karishma, rakhee gulzar, juhi chawla and mohnish behl.


== box office ==
the film had an average opening, and overall it was a medium-hit at the box-office. it was the seventh highest-grossing movie of the year (bollywood films of 2001).


== home media ==
ek rishtaa was released on dvd on 6 august 2001 across all regions in an ntsc-format single disc by tip top video. a high-definition dvd version, with audio and video digitally restored, was later released by shemaroo entertainment. even after ek rishtaa's box office success, as he had with his previous works, darshan refused to sell the film's television rights. the collective value of his films' unsold satellite rights was estimated to be 150 crore. darshan finally sold the rights to his films to zee in 2017, and ek rishtaa premiered on zee cinema on 16 september 2017, 16 years after its theatrical release. the film's premier garnered high ratings for the network.


== references ==


== external links ==
ek rishtaa: the bond of love at imdb