ek vivaah... aisa bhi (english: another kind of marriage) is a 2008 indian hindi-language romantic drama film. the film is directed by kaushik ghatak and stars sonu sood and isha koppikar. ek vivaah... aisa bhi was released on 7 november 2008.


== plot ==
ek vivaah... aisa bhi is the story of chandni (isha koppikar) who belongs to a middle-class family living in bhopal and prem (sonu sood) who is an unconventional ghazal singer and hails from an upper-middle-class family. chandnis mother died when she was 15 and she has two very young brother and sister. chandni and prem meet to practice for a ghazal competition and fall in love. families meet and agree for their marriage. on the day of their engagement, chandni's father dies leaving her younger brother and younger sister dependent on chandni herself. initially chandni decides to leave the house and her siblings under the care of her paternal uncle- however when she realizes that her unscrupulous uncle and aunt want only the house and care two hoots about her siblings, she decides to bring them up herself. prem promises to wait for her and keeps assisting her in all her troubles- while at the same time having become a famous ghazal singer.
chandni sacrifices her dream of becoming a singer and start giving music lessons at home. she also sings in parties and weddings to earn livelihood. years pass by, her siblings have grown up now. her brother graduates with flying colours and lands up with a good job. he insists chandni to leave all the responsibilities on him. she insists him to get married to his long time girlfriend natasha. since natasha is from an affluent family, he believes that she wont understand their culture and lifestyle. but he marries her anyway.
believing that now anuj and natasha will take care of the ancestral house, chandni and prem decide to get married. but chandnis problems never seem to end. chandni's brothers wife natasha refusing to keep up with traditions and demanding a separate life with her husband.
prems mother who had grown old and wants to see her son married requests chandni to marry him or leave him for good. chandni who has already sent her brother with his wife to lead a separate life, cannot leave her sister alone. she wants to send her sister abroad for further studies. she asks prem to forget her and get married for his mothers sake.
chandnis student who is settled with his family abroad agrees to help arrange chandnis sisters studies. his mother then gets a thought of getting them married. chandni agrees and plans to go on a pilgrimage after this. on the other hand, anuj feels helpless being separated from his sisters. natashas father makes her realise her mistake and understand the importance of family.
in the end, natasha and anuj returns home in younger sisters marriage. chandni is now free from her responsibilities. prem returns with his mother to finally take chandni to his home. chandi and prems marriage is arranged and they are shown singing in a show together signifying that they lived happily ever after.


== cast ==
sonu sood as prem ajmera
isha koppikar as chandni shrivastava ajmera
anand abhyankar as chachaji of chandni
amrita prakash as sandhya b. shrivastava
vishal malhotra as anuj b. shrivastava
alok nath as bhushan shrivastava died in face appearance anupam kher
smita jaykar mrs ajmera (prem's mother)
chhavi mittal as natasha a. shrivastava
vallabh vyas as dr. prabhat


== soundtrack ==
ravindra jain was the music director and lyricist of this album.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
ek vivaah aisa bhi at imdb