ekkees toppon ki salaami (transl.salute of 21 canons) is a 2014 indian hindi satire comedy film directed by ravindra gautam and produced by abhinav shukla under the banner of nautanki films. the film stars anupam kher, divyendu sharma, manu rishi, aditi sharma, rajesh sharma and neha dhupia in leading roles and was released in india on 10 october 2014.


== cast ==
anupam kher as purushottam narayan joshi
aditya kapadia as young purushotam narayan joshi
neha dhupia as jayaprabha
divyendu sharma as subhash joshi
manu rishi as shekhar joshi
aditi sharma as taanya srivastav
rajesh sharma as daya shankar pandey
achyut potdar
uttara baokar as kalawati
supriya kumari as sushma joshi
bhagwan tiwari as abhinav shivhare
sudhir pandey  as patwardhan
aasif sheikh as arnab sharma
harshad kumar as inspector


== plot ==
two sons set out to get their father what he dreamt of all through his life the ultimate sign of respect. high on thrill and laughter, this film takes the audience through the unbelievable attempt of shekhar and subhash joshi to provide their father an ekkees toppon ki salaami (21 gun salute). purushotam joshi is a common man who fails to earn his bit of appreciation despite being completely honest during his lifelong service as a government employee. joshis sons are however willing to go the extra mile to get their father his only wish. but will they succeed in their endeavour?


== promotion ==
srk launched the trailer of the ekkees toppon ki salaami. the song tod de kataar was launched in a special event next to the iconic the common man statue of rk laxman, where common people were felicitated for their service to the society.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of ekkees toppon ki salaami consists of 5 songs composed by ram sampath the lyrics of which were written by sandeep nath.


== critical reception ==
renuka vyavahare of the times of india gave the film a rating of 3.5 out of 5 and said that, "in times where materialistic things have taken precedence over people and good old values, etks is one of the most socially relevant films to have come out this year. it's not just a film but a philosophy." bollywood hungama gave the film a rating of 3 out of 5 saying that, "director ravindra gautam really needs to be applauded from the bottom of the heart for having come up with such a unique film. the way he has treated the subject and extracted performances from his actors, makes him a director to look forward to in the future." rachit gupta of filmfare reviewed the film saying that, "ekkees toppon ki salaami isnt the worst film ever made. its got its moments. but when it comes to cinematic quality it has no leg to stand on. its just too erratic to merit any credibility." rajeev masand of news18 gave the film a rating of 2 out of 5 saying that, "buried beneath the farcical humor, melodramatic performances and manipulative tear-jerking in ekkees toppon ki salaami is a well-intentioned message movie about the value of honesty." prateek sur of dna india praised the acting performances of the actors but criticized the length of the film and gave the film a rating of 3 out of 5. kaushani banerjee of deccan chronicle gave the film a rating of 1.5 out of 5 saying that the movie "falters much like the system it aims to satirize." paloma sharma of rediff gave the film a rating of 3.5 out of 5 and said that, "ekkees toppon ki salaami could have been flawless but for slightly substandard dialogues and cinematography." sanjukta sharma of live mint reviewed the film saying that, "kher leads a cast that drums up the melodrama quite effortlessly, as the film requires. but despite the best of intentions, ekkees toppon ki salaami is a tiresome film and at least half an hour longer than it should have been."


== references ==


== external links ==
ekkees toppon ki salaami at imdb 
ekkees toppon ki salaami at bollywood hungama