elaan is a 1994 indian hindi action film directed by guddu dhanoa. it stars amrish puri, akshay kumar and madhoo in pivotal roles. other cast includes farida jalal, dilip tahil and mohnish behl. the film was a critically and commercial successful and thus was declared a "hit".


== plot ==
elaan is a declaration of war against the reign of terror unleashed by the gang lords. the story revolves around an upright and principled police officer, a.c.p. ramakant chaudhary, whose eldest son vikas is killed in a pre-planned accident. but the a.c.p. is unable to nab the culprits for want of valid evidence. consequently, the a.c.p., his wife revati and younger son vishal are grief-stricken over the loss of young vikas. while the atmosphere in the city is already vitiated by the atrocities of gang lords baba khan and manna shetty, who enjoy the support of some unscrupulous police personnel, the a.c.p. vows to make the ruthless gangsters bite the dust, without taking the law in his own hands. on the other hand, vishal an angry young man, cannot stand this injustice since the police had failed to arrest his brother's killers, and he silently resents his a.c.p father's inaction in dealing with the culprits. the ideologies of the father and son clash  which lead to a conflict between a dutiful father and a reckless son. the only one who understands the agony of vishal is mohini, the daughter of head constable devkinandan sharma. the day comes when vishal confronts baba khan and manna shetty, which leads to tension and a gory situation for the a.c.p., as the gang lords threaten to eliminate the a.c.p. as well as his wife revati and son vishal.


== cast ==
akshay kumar... vishal chaudhary
amrish puri... a.c.p. ramakant chaudhary
madhoo... mohini sharma
farida jalal... revati chaudhary
dalip tahil... police commissioner desai
deven verma... devkinandan sharma
mohnish behl... vijay sharma
mohan joshi... baba khan
rami reddy... mana shetty
sulabha arya... parvati sharma
achyut potdar...public prosecutor
lalit tiwari...doctor deepak
narendra gupta


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
elaan at imdb