em magan (transl.our son) also known as emdan magan (transl.authoritarian's son) is a 2006 indian tamil-language drama film written and directed by thirumurugan. bharath, gopika, and nassar played the lead roles, while vadivelu, saranya ponvannan, and gajala appeared in supporting roles. the music was composed by vidyasagar with cinematography by sevilo raja and editing by jeyakumar. upon release, the film met with positive critical reception and massive commercial success. it was remade in kannada as puthra.


== plot ==
thirumalai (nassar) owns a provision store in a village and lives with his family consisting of his wife selvi (saranya ponvannan), brother-in-law karupatti ayyakannu (vadivelu), son krishnan (bharath), and daughter. thirumalai is very strict, short-tempered, and is referred as emdan by his relatives. krishnan studies poultry science in a college and also assists his father in managing the store. krishnan worries about his father's rude behaviour towards him.
divya (gajala) is krishnan's classmate and is also the daughter of the auditor who manages thirumalai's accounts. divya proposes to krishnan, who does not reciprocate as he loves his maternal uncle's (shanmugarajan) daughter janani (gopika). however, enmity prevails between thirumalai and his in-laws family. krishnan lives with the hope that the two families will unite someday, paving the way for his wedding.
thirumalai's father-in-law (ennatha kannaiya) passes away, and the two families come to talking terms, forgetting the enmity during the condolence. krishnan feels excited upon waiting to meet janani after so many years. janani also reciprocates the same feeling towards krishnan, and both love each other. one day, krishnan is tempted to kiss janani when there is a power cut. however, the power comes suddenly, and the entire family spots krishnan kissing janani.
thirumalai and janani's father get furious upon seeing this. a clash erupts between thirumalai and janani's father upon blaming each other for the incident. thirumalai beats up krishnan and takes his family back home. however, janani secretly hides in the car boot and comes along with them to krishnan's house. seeing this, thirumalai gets even more furious and sends both krishnan and janani out of the home.
krishnan marries janani, meets divya's father, and requests to help him find a job as he has now completed his college degree. krishnan successfully secures a job in a poultry farm with the help of divya's father. krishna works hard, his career progresses well, and his lifestyle improves. one day, thirumalai needs the signature of his son krishnan as he wanted to sell a property and goes to meet krishnan. thirumalai feels happy upon seeing his son in a good status but returns without expressing his happiness.
krishnan comes to meet his father with an alliance to be seen for his sister. an emotional conversation happens between them where krishnan expresses his feelings. the auditor arranges engagement to her daughter with a person who she loves. in the end, thirumalai overcomes his ego and expresses his happiness upon seeing his son's growth and finally unites with him. the movie ends showing the family leading a joyful life together.


== cast ==
bharath as krishna
gopika as janani
nassar as thirumalai (emden), krishna's father
vadivelu as karupatti ayyakannu, krishna's uncle
saranya ponvannan as selvi thirumalai, krishna's mother
gajala as divya
shanmugarajan as krishna's uncle and janani's father
rajyalakshmi as janani's mother
ennatha kannaiya as thirumalai's father-in-law
ravi prakash as krishnamoorthy
kadhal kandhas as krishna's cousin
krupa as vanitha, krishna's sister


== production ==
this was the debut venture of television director thirumurugan in cinema who made the successful series metti oli.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by vidyasagar.


== release ==
the film was initially titled emdan magan, however the title was shortened to em magan to exploit the tamil nadu government's rule of entertainment tax exemption for films with tamil titles.


=== critical reception ===
the movie received positive reviews from critics. many praised the performances of the lead cast and nassar and saranya's performances were praised as well. many praises were also specially given to vadivelu who shines in a role with equal opportunity for comedy, character and sentiments.
behindwoods wrote, "the director has ensured that the producer recovers his money. a family melodrama well enacted. thirumurugan is sure to continue his winning streak in kollywood also.".nowrunning.com wrote, "the director has made very good debut into the big screen. the story and proceedings are very natural and produces intense feelings. the families and women folk might turn up in good numbers for the film. some care could have been spared to the length of the film which seems a little too much. it is a good family emotional drama which is a must watch for all class of audience, especially in this age of generational differences. both elders who brag about irresponsible youth and youth who sulk about authoritative elders have to watch this film.".oneindia wrote, "director m. thirumurugan and his group have done a great job delivering an excellent movie reflecting family values and true love."sify wrote, "thirumurugan has extracted spell-binding performance from his lead actors and supporting cast. [..] at a time where many movies seem to speak from their wallets, here is one that speaks from the heart.".indiagitz wrote, "at a time when commercial cliches are holding sway, the director has tried his luck with emotions and sentiments. the story is set in an average middle-class family and the strength of the director lies in getting the specifics right and real.".balaji balasubramaniam of thiraipadam.com wrote, "bharath seems to be maturing into a very good and natural actor. he is able to express a lot of emotions with his expressions and body language and generates sympathy for his character. nasser gets a role that makes full use of his piercing stares and rough voice. he is very convincing in the role and relishes the chance to play a fully realized character instead of the half-baked, two-dimensional villain roles he usually gets. gopika looks as homely as the role calls for and has good chemistry with bharath while gajala is wasted in a throw-away role. saranya, as always, is able to generate laughs with her slightly whiny voice while vadivelu shines in a role with equal opportunity for both comedy and sentiments. vidyasagar comes up with a nice melody in unnodu thaan."s. r. ashok kumar of the hindu wrote, "director thirumurugan weaves through emotions and sentiments which form the base of the story. [..] thirumurugan, directing his first film, has shown that he can handle family drama quite well. he has a tight script and the scenes are arranged well leading to the climax. it is touching to find the son showing concern for the father in spite of the humiliation heaped on him. such subtle touches show much thought has gone into the film. and the viewers are sure to relate to the scenes that are so down-to-earth.".


== awards ==
filmfare awards southfilmfare award for best supporting actress  tamil  saranyatamil nadu state film awardsbest director  thirumurugan
best supporting actor  nassar
best supporting actress  saranya


== references ==


== external links ==
em magan at imdb