endangered species is a 1982 science fiction film starring robert urich, jobeth williams, peter coyote and hoyt axton, that was directed and co-written by alan rudolph.


== plot ==
thriller about a burnt out new york ex-cop reuben castle (robert urich) and a female sheriff (jo beth williams) who begin to fall in love while investigating a string of mysterious cattle mutilations in a small colorado town. castle is a retired alcoholic police lieutenant out visiting the town with his tomboy daughter. at first he tries to stay out of the case but finds himself involved after the mysterious death of his friend joe hiatt. hiatt was the editor of the local paper whose theories about black helicopters have aroused the ire of cattle baron ben morgan. morgan seems to know much more about the cattle killings than he is telling, and may know why the organs of the dead cattle are being harvested.  castle is trying miserably to stay sober, and he finds himself back in danger and in love, as he and the sheriff work together to get to the bottom of the mystery, encountering incredible danger and resistance from the frightened locals. morgan, who is turning the locals against castle, also seems to have links to organizations which are not local, although these are denied.


== cast ==
robert urich as ruben castle
jobeth williams as harriet perdue
hoyt axton as ben morgan
peter coyote as steele
dan hedaya as peck
paul dooley as joe hiatt
marin kanter as mackenzie castle
gailard sartain as the mayor
harry carey jr. as dr. emmer
john considine as	burnside


== reception ==
the new york times found the idea of the movie ripped from then current headlines of cattle mutilations, and praises the efforts of the cast and editor to make the material of the movie realistic, but that the movie overall was "dumb." tv guide was kinder to the movie, giving in three out of five stars. they also found the cast to be excellent, and blamed the movie's failure on poor distribution by mgm. the especially recommended the movies for fans of director alan rudolph, and praised effect of low-flying helicopters snatching cows from their pastures at night. creature feature also liked the movie, giving it 3.5 out of 5 stars. finding the movie thrilling and enthralling.


== references ==


== external links ==
endangered species at imdb
endangered species at box office mojo
endangered species at rotten tomatoes