every day's a holiday (1937) is a comedy film starring and co-written by mae west, directed by a. edward sutherland, and released by paramount pictures. the film, released on december 18, 1937, also starred edmund lowe, charles winninger, and charles butterworth. this was west's last film under her paramount contract, after which she went on to make my little chickadee (1940) for universal pictures and the heat's on (1943) for columbia pictures.


== plot ==
in turn-of-the-century new york city, con artist peaches o'day (west) gets into trouble with the law for trying to sell the brooklyn bridge, but jim mccarey (lowe), a police captain, likes her enough that he lets her off with a promise from peaches to leave town. she hatches a scheme instead with the wealthy van doon (winninger) and butler graves (butterworth) to perform as a singer, calling herself fifi, disguised in a black wig.
quade (lloyd nolan), a chief of police with political ambitions, makes a pass at "fifi" and is rejected. in anger, he orders the club closed. capt. mccarey refuses and becomes quade's rival, even persuaded to run against him for mayor.
before giving a speech at madison square garden during the campaign, mccarey is kidnapped. he escapes just in time and the publicity is helpful in his election victory. it turns out that peaches planned the whole thing, resulting in a romantic relationship with the new mayor of new york.


== awards ==
the film was nominated an academy award for best art direction by wiard ihnen.


== cast ==
mae west - peaches o'day
edmund lowe - capt. mccarey
charles butterworth - larmadou graves
charles winninger - van reighle van pelter van doon
walter catlett - nifty bailey
lloyd nolan - john quade
louis armstrong - himself
george rector - himself
herman bing - fritz krausmeyer
roger imhof - trigger mike
chester conklin - cabby
lucien prival - danny the dip
adrian morris - henchman
francis mcdonald - henchman
john indrisano - henchman


== references ==


== external links ==
every day's a holiday at imdb
every day's a holiday at the tcm movie database