evil bong is a 2006 american stoner-slasher-comedy film directed by charles band about a group of stoners who smoke from a sentient, malevolent bong, that traps the smoker in the bong world, a surreal realm filled with killer strippers and other full moon creatures. the ending features an extended cameo by tommy chong, of cheech & chong fame. brandi cunningham from vh1's rock of love with bret michaels and horror icon bill moseley also make appearances in the film. it has spawned a franchise. 


== plot ==
nerdy college student alistair mcdowell moves in with law school drop-out larnell, and his current roommates typical "surfer-stoner" bachman and former baseball player brett. when larnell sees an ad for a large bong that the previous owner claims was "possessed", he responds. they receive the bong and start smoking (with the exception of alistair). alistair meets bretts girlfriend luann and her friend janet, who alistair develops a crush on.
later that night, bachmans soul is pulled into the bong world, which takes the form of a hellish strip club, inside evil bong, where he meets ooga booga and ivan burroughs, who warns him to watch himself around the evil bong. he's introduced to one of the strippers (kristen cladwell) who has skulls on her bra that start biting his neck, killing him, while ooga booga watches on, masturbating. the next morning, the other roommates find bachman dead on the couch. alistair tells to them that it's probably from the weed but larnell points out they all smoked the weed. larnell also notices that the bong has changed; a face has started to appear. the trio hide his body and are nearly caught when larnell's paralyzed, wealthy grandfather, cyril, comes by to tell larnell that he just got remarried.
later on, the bong (voiced by michele mais) starts speaking to larnell (to larnell only, no one else hears) and tempts him to smoke from her, which he does. pulled into the bong world, he sees bachman (who seems to be fine), the gingerdead man, and cyril. eventually a stripper gives larnell a lap dance, and he's killed in a similar way that bachman was killed. back in the real world, luann and janet come over and the group (again with the exception of alistair) smokes from the bong. after brett and luann pass out, they wake up in the same strip club and they're greeted by jack attack, and luann is taken away by the bouncer. brett is then treated by his ex-girlfriend carla brewster, a stripper in the bong world. she eventually uses her lip-cupped bra to bite off brett's genitals, killing him.
meanwhile, when alistair starts figuring out what's going on, janet falls prey to the bong and passes out. jimbo leary (tommy chong) enters and proclaims that the bong, named eebee, is his and has a voodoo curse on it: once you take enough hits from it, it brings you to the bong world where it kills you. in order to save janet, alistair enters the bong world. meanwhile, jimbo tries destroying the bong with a hammer, chainsaw, and (resorting to drastic measures) a bomb. eebee unleashes a cloud of marijuana smoke, causing jimbo to pass out.
meanwhile, in the bong world, eebee forces the strippers to seduce alistair, but he breaks them off. during his search, he bumps into jack deth. once he finds a stoned janet, eebee reveals her motives: to control the world by turning the air into pot smoke and the oceans into bong water, making everyone massive stoners. they take "vitamins" (that jimbo gave them) to make them sober again. jimbo, who has just got sucked into the bong world, tells them to go ahead and escape while he takes care of eebee. jimbo shows eebee the time bomb strapped to his chest. he activates the bomb and blows up eebee. back in the real world, the gang has their souls returned and everyone comes back to life. however, jimbo has been apparently killed, along with the bong, which is now shattered into pieces. the final scene shows that jimbo is now the king of the bong world.


== cast ==
david weidoff - alistair mcdowell, a nerdy science student whos larnell, bachman, and bretts new roommate
john patrick jordan - larnell, a stereotypical stoner
mitch eakins - bachman, a stereotypical surfer and stoner
brian lloyd - brett, a stereotypical jock
robin sydney - luann, bretts attractive girlfriend
kristyn green - janet
tommy chong - jimbo leary, eebees longtime owner, discovers her in the amazon
michelle mais (voice) - eebee, an evil bong who is awakened every time someone smokes from her. she gains power once she pulls a person into the bong world and kills them
jacob witkin - cyril cornwallis, larnells grandfather, confined to a wheelchair. he disapproves or his grandson in general and is recurring my vocal about it
phil fondacaro - ivan burroughs
tim thomerson - jack deth
bill moseley - bong world patron
brandi cunningham - carla brewster
dana danes - bong world dancer
gina-raye carter - bong world dancer
sonny carl davis - rabbit, the delivery man; although davis role in this film is minor, he becomes a main character in the series
sylvester "bear" terkay - bouncer
dale dymkoski - male dancer
mae laborde - rosemary cornwallis
john carl buechler - gingerdead man (puppeteer/voice)


== release ==
the film was released on dvd originally on october 24, 2006. the dvd includes a behind-the-scenes 20 minute special feature with the cast and crew.  it has been included on numerous subsequent dvd releases with its various sequels.


== soundtrack ==

rare for a direct to dvd film, an associated soundtrack is available on lakeshore records and features music from twiztid, insane clown posse, sen dog (from cypress hill), and volume 10 ("pistol grip pump"). it also has music from the film's composers, district 78, and two tracks from music group kottonmouth kings. 


== reception ==
dread central published a positive review shortly after the film's release in 2006, saying that despite its flaws, "evil bong is an enjoyable little flick that truly harkens back to the early, glory days of full moon pictures", but points out the horror is secondary to the film's comedy. the reviewer compares the humor in the film to that of a sitcom and furthers the comparison by pointing out that "the majority of the film is set in the living room of this one apartment (much like a sitcom)". ultimately, the reviewer argues that the film "is the most well-paced movie band has churned out in ages but even it hits a few lulls along the way due to the premise being too flimsy for both the running time and the films limited budget". the review also covers the aspects of the dvd release and special features included. spectrum culture reviewed the film in 2017, over a decade after its initial release. the review heavily criticized the film with particular criticism given to the characters who the reviewer calls "an onslaught of college douchebags" and for taking place largely in a singular location. the review also argues that the vernacular used by the stoners of the film would be considered "total narc lingo" by "any true high times subscriber". 


== franchise ==
it was followed by several sequels, evil bong 2: king bong, and evil bong 3d: the wrath of bong and one crossover film gingerdead man vs. evil bong. the series has since produced new installments each year between 2015-2018: in 2015 with evil bong 420, another in fall of 2016, titled evil bong high-5!, a sixth entry titled evil bong 666 in 2017, and evil bong 777 in 2018.


== references ==


== external links ==
evil bong at imdb