sandeep aur pinky faraar (transl.sandeep and pinky have absconded) is a 2021 indian hindi-language black comedy film directed and produced by dibakar banerjee with distribution by yash raj films. parineeti chopra and arjun kapoor play lead roles. the filming began on 7 november 2017 in mahipalpur. initially scheduled for theatrical release on 20 march 2020, the film was postponed due to covid-19 pandemic in india. after being delayed for a year, it was finally released theatrically on 19 march 2021. the movie, despite creating controversy before its release, received mostly positive response from the critics who praised the story, screenplay, dibakars direction, social commentary   and performances although its  pacing received some criticism. the movie was under vote brigading on imdb because of the insider-outsider debate in bollywood.


== premise ==
the film follows the story of a man and woman who represent two completely different indians. pinkesh "pinky" dahiya is a haryanavi police officer while sandeep kaur is someone from the corporate world. however, they are united by their mistrust, suspicion, and hatred for each other.


== cast ==
parineeti chopra as sandeep "sandy" walia
arjun kapoor as satinder "pinky" dahiya
jaideep ahlawat as tyagi
raghubir yadav as uncle
neena gupta as aunty
daljeet singh as bose
jaipreet singh as garry ji
rahul kumar as munna
dev chauhan  as nyal
abhishek yadav  as arshad
suruchi aulakh as purva


== production ==
yash raj films announced the film on 3 july 2017. it marks the third collaborations between kapoor and chopra after they starred together in ishaqzaade (2012), which was followed by the two pairing up again in namaste england (2018).on 30 october 2017, arjun kapoor shared an image of his character which is shown to be a cop. on 27 march 2018, the second look of both actors came out giving a glimpse of their different worlds.filming took place at the nearby places (pithoragarh) of indo-nepal border of uttarakhand  . to get into their characters, banerjee insisted the two not to communicate with each other prior to filming and even off-screen. filming of arjun's portion wrapped up on 17 january 2018.


== release ==
initially scheduled for release on 20 march 2020, the film release has been indefinitely postponed due to the covid-19 pandemic. producers announced in may 2020 that the film's release will be postponed until cinemas reopen. the film was released on 19 march 2021.


== soundtrack ==
this films soundtrack is composed by  anu malik, dibakar banerjee, narendra chandra and kamlesh haripuri. lyrics written by anu malik, dibakar banerjee, pardhaan, narendra chandra, sangeeta chandra and kamlesh haripuri. the film's background score is composed by dibakar banerjee.


== references ==


== external links ==
sandeep aur pinky faraar at imdb
sandeep aur pinky faraar at bollywood hungama