father came too! is a 1964 british comedy film directed by peter graham scott and starring james robertson justice, leslie phillips and stanley baxter. it is a loose sequel to the fast lady.it was produced by the independent artists company for distribution by rank. it was shot at beaconsfield studios with sets designed by the art director harry pottle. the village of turville in buckinghamshire was used for filming the pageant scenes. the film's dresses were designed by julie harris.


== plot ==
dexter (stanley baxter) and juliet (sally smith) munro are a young newly-married couple who move to a run-down country cottage in hopes of escaping from juliet's overbearing father, sir beverly grant (james robertson justice). however, the couple is soon confronted by their new home's battered structure.  juliet's father offers help from a reputable building firm, but this help is refused by dexter, who wants to remain independent of juliet's father.
dexter sees an ad in the local paper and employs josh (ronnie barker) to do the work.  the house is finished, although well over budget, but eventually burns down because juliet's father had changed the fuses from 15 amp to 30 amp, causing the fire.  roddy, their estate agent (and aspiring actor) (leslie phillips) saves the day, telling dexter and juliet that a motorway is soon to be built on their land, so they can sell at a profit, and gives them the keys to a cottage requiring no work in the adjoining field.


== cast ==
james robertson justice as sir beverly grant
leslie phillips as roddy chipfield
stanley baxter as dexter munro
sally smith as juliet munro
eric barker as mr. gallagher
kenneth cope as ron
terry scott as executioner
hugh lloyd as mary, queen of scots
fred emney as sir francis drake
peter jones as charles ii
ronnie barker as josh
philip locke as stan
timothy bateson as wally
cardew robinson as fire officer
peter woodthorpe as farmer
james villiers as benzil bulstrode
john bluthal as robert the bruce
joseph brady as guy fawkes
raymond huntley as mr. wedgewood
vanda hudson as nell gwynne
patrick newell as king harold
geoffrey dunn as mr. trumper
sydney bromley as lang
julian orchard as bath salesman
clifford earl as motorcycle policeman
nicky henson as motorcyclist
barbara roscoe as lana
anita sharp-bolster as mrs. trumper
arthur mullard as traffic warden
michael ward as man at auction


== references ==


== external links ==
father came too! at imdb
father came too! at allmovie