feng shui 2 (stylized feng shui ) is a 2014 philippine supernatural horror film. it is the sequel of the first film in 2004. kris aquino reprises her role as joy ramirez and coco martin plays lester anonuevo, the new owner of the 'cursed bagua'. the film co-stars cherry pie picache, carmi martin, ian veneracion, and joonee gamboa. it focuses on lester (martin) who, upon getting the cursed bagua, starts to have luck and prosperity, but with deadly consequences. this film was star cinema's official entry in the 2014 metro manila film festival.it is also the first filipino movie to be rendered in 4d and was exclusively shown at the xd theater of sm mall of asia under a partnership of sm lifestyle entertainment and star cinema.


== plot ==
the movie continues from the ending of the first film, when the twins discover the cursed bagua mirror in joy ramirez's (kris aquino) old house. there is a flashback to joy's attempt to destroy the mirror, interrupted by the realization that her cousin thelma, and her children denton and ingrid died in a vehicular accident. after 10 years, the new owner of the mirror becomes afraid when she finds her husband dead, lying on a tiger stuffed toy, his death corresponding to his birth on the year of the tiger. she sees her twin daughters (joj and jai agpangan), urging her to escape. she jumps off the terrace of their condominium unit and falls on monkey bars. coincidentally, the mirror's owner was born in the year of the monkey.
lester anonuevo (coco martin) visits the crime scene to take the bagua mirror, which had been taken by hsui liao (joonee gamboa), convincing lester to steal it. lester was initially has plenty of debts but his luck began to change. he finds a wallet with a phone and a card, which he redeems. he then got a new house inside a more affluent estate. before he leaves, lester sees the ghost of lotus feet, the woman who cursed the bagua in her dying breath. later that night, lester's alcoholic mother ruby (carmi martin) dies as a result of ingesting rat poison while drinking, revealing her to be born in the year of the rat. the death of his mother drives lester to attempt to destroy the mirror. the estate agent arrives and distracts him briefly. when he returns to his house, he finds the mirror had regenerated.
a few deaths later, jack (ian de leon) tries to break into lester's house. lester's father robert (rez cortez) checks the house and encounters jack. robert is stabbed to death, and jack is killed with a fire extinguisher bearing a tag that says "red rabbit." lester realizes robert and jack were both born in the year of the rabbit. joy, lily (cherry pie picache), and hsui liao go to lester's house to talk about what happened after lester stole the bagua mirror. when they asked to go to the front of the house, the mirror had disappeared. they go to lily's house, lily thinks she doesn't have the mirror. they go to douglas' (ian veneracion) house. they notice that douglas suddenly became rich and that he was ready to propose to joy, but they realize that he looked at the bagua mirror.
while the four visit the feng shui house to destroy the mirror, lily and her housemaid are digging for gold before getting killed by electrocution. douglas got into a fight with street people, presumably getting killed after being outnumbered, hsui liao accidentally looked at the mirror and got stabbed to death, and lester got beaten up by street people while getting to the feng shui house. finally, lester and joy destroy the bagua mirror together. after destroying the mirror, joy notices lester's body, lifeless. she goes to his body and mourns, shortly after, the police and douglas arrive, joy's face shocked at douglas' arrival.


== cast ==


=== main ===
kris aquino as joy ramirez
coco martin as lester anonuevo


=== supporting ===
cherry pie picache as lily mendoza
ian veneracion as douglas
carmi martin as ruby anonuevo
rez cortez as robert anonuevo
joonee gamboa as hsui liao
beauty gonzalez as ellen
ian de leon as jack
martin escudero as moy
raikko mateo as mio
diana zubiri as woman
teodoro baldemaro as boss paulo
elizabeth chua as old chinese woman
richard lester rosales as mei lien/lotus feet
kych minemoto as endon
randy see as leonard
jenine desiderio as mother of the twins
froilan sales as father of the twins
joj and jai agpangan as the twins


== production ==
the idea of a sequel was created after coco martin approached director chito s. roo and kris aquino about the first film. being a fan of the original movie in 2004, martin asked aquino and roo if they would be interested in a sequel, and said that he would be glad to join them. roo and aquino decided that after ten years, it was the right time for the sequel.
the shooting of the film was set to commence by late august 2014. with the first cut of the film, joy's character (kris aquino) was not present for most of the story. because of this, the producers asked for re-shoots, to give her additional screen time.
the first official trailer of the film was attached to the star cinema romantic comedy film past tense, which was released on november 22, 2014.


== reception ==
the film was met with high expectations by fans since the first movie had been a cult classic, considered the 'scariest filipino horror film ever'.the film received a mixed to positive response from critics, who cited the outstanding performances of coco martin and cherry pie picache but said the film lacked the originality of the first movie. they also applauded kris aquino's performance, saying it was a great improvement from her past horror films.
audiences received the film more positively, citing it as a worthy sequel.


== box office ==
the film became the second-highest-grossing film at the 2014 metro manila film festival. it now holds the title of having the highest opening gross of any filipino horror film of all time, having earned a total of 235.0 million at the box office.


== see also ==
list of ghost films


== references ==


== external links ==
feng shui 2 at imdb