fida (translation: infatuated) is a 2004 indian hindi-language romantic thriller film released on 20 august 2004. the film is directed by ken ghosh and stars fardeen khan, kareena kapoor and shahid kapoor. initially, the film was offered to amisha patel, however, the actress refused it due to another film commitment. this is the first film in which kareena kapoor played a negative role.


== plot ==
somebody empties the bank accounts of many people, including babu anna (akhilendra mishra), an underworld don, via an internet theft. the police are clueless about the robber, and anna wants revenge. in another story, jai malhotra (shahid kapoor) lives with his best friend, sonia (kim sharma). he meets neha mehra (kareena kapoor) and falls in love with her instantly. at first, neha rejects jai, causing him to attempt suicide. after sonia chastises neha regarding jai's actions, she then falls for him too.
one day, jai sees neha trying to hang herself after getting a phone call. she tells him that her dead father owed a huge amount of money to babu anna's underworld. to repay the amount, he became part of a gang of hackers who were responsible for the internet thefts. after his death, babu's anna underworld began pursuing neha to recover the money. jai and neha try to sell their apartments to get enough money, to no avail. a visit from a client leads jai to consider robbing a bank to get the necessary money. at a bank, jai spots a rich man named vikram singh (fardeen khan) withdrawing a huge sum of money and instead decides to steal from him. however, vikram catches jai during his attempts to break into his house.
instead of reporting jai to the police, vikram demands an explanation for his actions. upon learning the whole story, vikram reveals that he is the hacker behind the internet thefts but agrees to help jai. in return, jai has to take the blame for the thefts. jai agrees, gives the money to neha and turns himself in. jai is escorted by police to be introduced for the trial, but anna has his men intercept them to kidnap jai. a shootout results between the gang and police as jai is able to escape and runs to neha's apartment, only to find both neha and vikram waiting for him. he is horrified to learn that they conspired against him to steal all the money and neha's love was just a ruse to con him to take a fall.
jai escapes from the apartment but is shot off a train by a police officer. even though his body is not found, he is presumed dead. two months later, neha and vikram start getting anonymous phone calls. neha believes that the calls are from jai and that he is still alive. jai, who is very much alive, is bent on getting revenge on both neha and vikram.
jai makes life miserable for both vikram and neha. one day when neha and vikram go out for a movie, vikram finds neha hanging by her neck in the toilet, and neha confirms that jai is alive. vikram out of rage tracks jai down and severely beats him up, threatening to murder him if he comes back into their lives again. vikram then reports jai to babu anna, thus giving him a whiff of the affair. this does not deter jai as he later blackmails vikram by kidnapping neha, forcing him to turn himself in. vikram obliges and is led to neha; however, all three are intercepted and taken hostage by babu anna and his gang, demanding all his money from them. jai cleverly deflects anna and forces vikram to transfer anna's money back into his account. catching them off guard, jai and vikram finish anna and his gang.
in the melee, vikram has jai cornered but jai finally overpowers him. however, neha strikes jai hard from behind, allowing vikram to gun jai down. vikram and neha mock jai as they watch him struggle with his fatal injuries. jai stuns the two by rising with babu anna's gun and shoots neha in the forehead, killing her instantly, to vikram's horror. jai collapses and boasts about settling the score for once whilst finally succumbing to his injuries, leaving vikram alone to grieve over neha's corpse. later, a news report reveals that somebody has made a very hefty and generous donation to the missionary charity fund, whilst vikram is shown heading out in a boat. thus it is implied that vikram gave away all of babu anna's money to charity as he no longer has any good use for it.


== cast ==
fardeen khan as vikram singh
kareena kapoor as neha verma
shahid kapoor as jai malhotra
kim sharma as sonia
akhilendra mishra as babu anna
viju khote as a potential buyer
dinesh hingoo as a real estate agent
vivek vaswani as a bank employee


== music ==
the soundtrack was composed by anu malik. lyrics were by sameer. kareena kapoor and shahid kapoor lent their voices for the track "aaja ve maahi" (ek main hoon). singer alisha chinoy lent her voice for the popular number " maine jisko chaha", making a successful comeback with malik after their controversy in 1996.
the opening theme and fardeen khan's training theme is a blatant rip off from "battle without honor or humanity" by tomoyasu hotei. 
the soundtrack was very popular, and the song "nazar nazar" was a chartbuster . according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 14,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's tenth highest-selling.


== references ==


== external links ==
fida at imdb 
fida at bollywood hungama