fighter is a 2011 indian bengali-language action film directed by rabi kinagi and starring jeet and srabanti chatterjee. the film was produced by eskay movies, the soundtrack was composed by indradeep dasgupta. the movie was super hit in the box office. this film is a remake of the 2007 telugu movie lakshyam.


== plot ==
the film starts with a flashback. acp bose (ferdous ahmed) is a sincere police officer happily married and lives with his parents and younger brother surya (jeet). surjo is a college student and he falls in love with his classmate indu (srabanti). enter section shankar, bharat kaul, the villain who is notorious for settlements and land deals. indu comes across acp bose when she is on a field trip from her college with her friends. she gets friendly with his daughter pinky who tells her that she would get her introduced to her uncle surya and they would make a good pair. it turns out that surya studies in indu's college and soon after they accidentally even come to know each other and get close.
acp bose investigates the case of a dreaded criminal section shankar whom no one has been able to touch. he is even involved with a land deal involving crores of money which is completely illegal and others including the d.i.g. is involved. when the chairman of the bank who has lent money for the deal demand the money back as the deal hasnt worked, but section shankar eliminates him. the people who are customers of the bank take to the streets and try to damage the bank. acp bose arrives there, arrests the manager and takes him away. somehow section shankar comes to know where the manager has been taken. he arrives there with his men and the d.i.g. and nearly kill acp bose. section shankar asks his men to dump the body. on the way, somehow surya gets involved and ultimately rescues his brother from a burning bus and the elder brother dies in the younger brother's arms. the entire media and the people think that acp bose has swindled off all the money as they have been made to believe that by the d.i.g. surya decides to take revenge on the people who killed his brother. firstly he kills nikhil (his friend and section shankar's friend) . then he kills the d.i.g. (he had been taken to jail and he had escaped). nikhil had also kidnapped indu as he wants her at any cost, but surya rescues her. section shankar also kidnaps the entire family of surya. surya goes to section shankar house's where he kills shankar and rescues his family under the supervision of the new d.i.g. who supports him wholeheartedly.


== cast ==
jeet as surya
srabanti as indu
locket chatterjee as a.c.p bose's wife
ferdous ahmed as a.c.p bose
biplab chatterjee as a corrupt d.i.g.
ashish vidyarthi as d.i.g. (cameo appearance)
biswajit chakraborty as surya's father
joy badlani as indu's father
bharat kaul as section shankar
sumit ganguly
mousumi saha as indu's mother
biswanath basu as ice-cream boy
gargi banerjee as newsreader
arindam saha as train passenger


== soundtrack ==
the album is composed by indradeep dasgupta for fighter.

all lyrics are written by goutam susmit, priyo chatterjee, prasen.


== references ==

fighter at imdb
fighter at the gomolo