fire with fire is a 2012 american action thriller film directed by david barrett starring josh duhamel, bruce willis, vincent d'onofrio and rosario dawson. duhamel plays a firefighter forced to confront a neo-nazi murderer. the film was released straight to dvd and blu-ray disc on november 6, 2012.


== plot ==
following a grueling day of work, firefighter jeremy thomas coleman (josh duhamel) and his co-workers contemplate ending the day with a case of 15-year-old scotch. jeremy enters a convenience store to buy snacks, but is interrupted by david hagan (vincent d'onofrio), an aryan brotherhood crime boss. he accuses the store owner of refusing to sell his store which hagan wants to further his criminal enterprise. the store owner says he buys protection from the crips and the store is in their territory so it wouldn't be useful for hagan's purposes. 
hagan kills the store owner's son and then the store owner. jeremy narrowly escapes. police detective mike cella (bruce willis), whose former partner was murdered by hagan while they pursued him in a different case, sees an opportunity to bring hagan to justice. hagan is detained and put into a police lineup. hagan, sure that jeremy is behind the two-way mirror, recites jeremy's full name, address and social security number.
before the trial, jeremy agrees to enter the witness protection program, and changes his last name to douglas. he leaves the fire department and is moved to new orleans. although jeremy finds it difficult to cope with the loss of his career, he finds consolation in his budding romance with talia durham (rosario dawson), a deputy united states marshal assigned to his case. later, hagan's attorney arranges for him to be released from prison in the weeks leading up to the trial. as a result, jeremy and talia find their lives in jeopardy when two of hagan's hitmen ambush them; though talia is wounded, jeremy mortally wounds one man, forcing them to retreat. hagan calls jeremy, threatening to kill everyone he loves whether he testifies or not. jeremy vows to kill hagan first and abandons the witness protection program.
jeremy travels home to long beach, california where he seeks out an eastside crips to buy an untraceable weapon. jeremy stakes out one of hagan's hiding places and kills three of his men. he leaves behind fingerprints but the police can not identify him because his identity is protected by his witsec status. detective cella figures that jeremy is behind the deaths. jeremy grows bolder. he identifies the location of one of hagan's buildings and tortures one of hagan's men who directs him to harold gethers (richard schiff), hagan's attorney, to find out where hagan will be. gethers, who only works for hagan out of fear, gives jeremy the location of an abandoned building where hagan will be that night.
talia arrives at long beach and tries to convince jeremy to abandon his plan. jeremy locks talia in the bathroom and gets away, but hagan's hitman arrives soon after and kidnaps talia. that night, jeremy, using his firefighting knowledge, sets ablaze the building where hagan and his men are meeting, killing hagan's men. when jeremy realizes talia is also in the building, he puts on his fireman's suit and enters the building to rescue her. talia manages to break free of her bonds and kills hagan's hitman in vengeance as he attempts to flee the blaze. jeremy runs into hagan inside the burning building and, after a struggle, talia kills hagan. jeremy leaves the building with talia. in the aftermath, detective cella, while conversing with the da, states that no evidence was left behind at the burnt building to charge anyone with the deaths of hagan and his men. cella is seen putting away a photo of him and his old partner.


== cast ==
josh duhamel as jeremy coleman/jeremy douglas
bruce willis as mike cella
rosario dawson as talia durham
vincent d'onofrio as david hagan
50 cent as lamar
richard schiff as harold gethers, hagan's attorney
quinton jackson as wallace
vinnie jones as boyd
bonnie somerville as karen westlake
julian mcmahon as robert, the hit man
nnamdi asomugha as sherrod


== release ==
fire with fire was released direct-to-video in the united states on november 6, 2012. it made $2,371,816 in domestic sales on home video.


== reception ==
rotten tomatoes, a review aggregator, reports that 7% of 14 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average rating was 3.3/10. mark adams of screen daily wrote that it is a misfire with a story that is "more silly than exciting".  tom huddleston of time out london rated it 3/5 stars and called it "a sturdy, unambitious but thoroughly watchable action thriller."  nathan rabin of the a.v. club wrote that it "could be a lot worse" and "is cheesy but moderately effective."  paul bradshaw of total film rated it 3/5 stars and called it a "daft, generic revenger".  olly richards of empire rated it 1/5 stars and wrote, "avoid like the plague. the nasty bubonic kind."  henry barnes of the guardian rated it 1/5 stars and called it too violent and clichd.  tyler foster of dvd talk rated it 3.5/5 stars and said that it gives its demographic exactly what they want but no more.  gordon sullivan of dvd verdict called it a clichd, mediocre b movie.


== see also ==

bruce willis filmography


== references ==


== external links ==
fire with fire at imdb
fire with fire at rotten tomatoes