firebird 2015 ad is a 1981  canada & united states science fiction film directed  by david m. robertson and starring darren mcgavin and doug mcclure.


== plot ==
in the year 2015, the us government outlaws the distribution of gasoline to the public, reserving it only for the politicians, the military and law enforcement. while it is implied this is due to a fuel shortage, later dialogue rebuffs this stating that gasoline is in abundance. civilians are also banned from owning or using any form of motor vehicle, and those that do are referred to as burners, and it is shown that this is a form of rebellion. burners are monitored and dealt with harshly by the dvc; the department of vehicle control.
red (darren mcgavin), a middle aged burner drives a 1980 pontiac turbo trans am. his teenage son cameron (robert wisden) however isn't much of a car enthusiast and always raises the issue of how red is breaking the law.
meanwhile, another burner is planning on chauffeuring a senator to a conference where he intends to make civilian use of motor vehicles legal again. but while en route to pick up his passenger, the burner is intercepted by a dvc squad led by mcvain (doug mcclure). his subordinate dolan, a quiet sociopath, blows the burner away with a grenade launcher. shana, another member of mcvain's team, is appalled by this act and how mcvain constantly overlooks the matter.
red takes cameron for a ride to try and spark his interest in motor cars. they then meet up with red's friend indy; another burner who drives a ford mustang. while he and red race through the desert to see whose car is faster, cameron gets acquainted with indy's frisky daughter jill, who makes repeated sexual advances on him while showing him how to drive her dune buggy.
red and indy's race however is cut short when the dvc lay an ambush. but an over-anxious member fires too soon and the two make their getaway.
cameron and jill head in to a barn to have sex, but are caught by mcvain's subordinates who rough up cameron and assault jill before making off with her. cameron limps his way home and tells red and indy what happened. they modify their cars for a raid on the dvc's camp site to rescue jill.
meanwhile, shana, appalled at jill's treatment, frees her and the two escape while the rest of the dvc are run down by the burners. the next day cameron and jill decide to chauffeur the senator themselves in the firebird, while red gets acquainted with shana.


== cast ==
darren mcgavin as red
doug mcclure as mcvain
george touliatos as indy
robert wisden as cam (as robert charles wisden)
mary beth rubens as jill
barbara williams as shana
alex diakun as dolan
lee broker as saunders
frank pellegrino as chance
bill berry as burner


== reception ==
moria found that the movie seemed to be made by car aficionados and spends almost all of its time on car chases, presenting a logical problem within the movie as gasoline is illegal for the public and maybe in short supply. while the romance is a plus, and the movie avoids many of the mad max tropes, ultimately the movie is not interesting. likewise tv guide said that the movie was only for car lovers giving it one of four stars. they state that the movie showed a "lack of intelligence and the filmmakers' lack of technical know-how".


== home release ==
released on dvd as part of the acme tv movie classics featured as part of the canuzplotation film festival  and as part of brandon's cult movie reviews.


== references ==


== external links ==
firebird 2015 ad at imdb