5 star is an indian tamil film released in 2002. it was directed by susi ganeshan.


== plot ==
the story focuses on five friends, prabhu, elango, sundar, indra and priya at the madras institute of technology, who want to remain friends throughout their lifespan and hope to join the same company after graduation. during a vacation elango, goes home where he is forced to marry his old-fashioned cousin, eshwari, by his tough disciplinarian father. once back to college he hides the fact about his marriage to his friends but later the marriage becomes public when relatives of eshwari come to visit elango. while their dream to work together becomes true, elango alone gets a transfer to bombay. the friends fight but later reunite. before elango goes bombay the friends force him to visit his wife and put him on a train. but elango manages to get off the train and from there loses touch with his friends and family in the village.
the friends part and six years later prabu and sundar come back to join priya and indra in chennai. on the train journey back, prabu meets elango's wife eashwari. prabu falls in love with eashwari without realizing who she is. eventually he along with his friends finds out the truth about eashwari, who is waiting with hopes of her husband to return. the four friends decided to help eshwari find the whereabouts of elango. one day prabu finds out that elango might be in switzerland. prabu decides to go to switzerland. one fine day he finds elango but to his shocks elango has a kid and is married to a swiss woman. meanwhile, in india elango's father kills himself. prabu goes back to india and learns that everyone knows about elango's marriage.
eshwari decides to marry again and move on with life rather than thinking about elango. her village people decides to marry her off to one of her relative but she threatens them telling them off that she would decide her own life and no one is going control her life anymore. the story ends with all four friends and their husbands and wife along with eshwari enjoying a day at the beach.


== cast ==
prasanna as prabhu
kanika as eshwari
krishna as elango
sandhya as priya
karthick as sundar
mangai as indra
vijayan as elango's father
chitti babu as train ticket examiner (ttr)
srilekha rajendran as flower seller
sai ( junior)


== production ==
in march 1999, susi ganeshan was able to convince producer shanti thiagarajan to fund his first feature film, after he left mani ratnam's team of assistant directors. the film was initially titled thithikkum thee and was to feature to murali in the lead role of a firefighter. in return for producing his first film, shanti thiagarajan requested ganeshan to also work on another film starring her son prashanth in the lead role and consequently, ganeshan finalised a script titled pepsi: generation next. in a turn of events, prashanth replaced murali in the director's first project, which was retitled as virumbugiren in early 2000. pepsi was later supposed to star madhavan in a lead role, but he eventually did not feature as the team opted for newcomers. susi ganeshan, an erstwhile assistant director of mani ratnam announced this film in 2001 and finished in between production delays of his long-delayed film virumbugiren.
for the heroine, susi ganeshan spotted her on a magazine cover page and insisted on her performing the lead female role in his second feature film. divya eventually entered the film industry, accepting the offer, while her name was changed to kanika. she completed the entire film during her summer holidays, since she was a student. prasanna who was doing college at that time saw an ad on vijay tv that madras talkies was auditioning for newcomers, he applied and got selected. for other lead roles, karthik, the son of a tirupur businessman, krishna, an earlier assistant to director rajiv menon, sandhya, a model and also a former ms. chennai, and mangaikarasi, a dancer based in sweden. the film marked the debut of cameraman ravi varman in tamil cinema. singer anuradha sriram and her husband sriram parasuram made their debut as music directors with this film.the film had a 10-day shooting schedule at the m.i.t. college where susi ganesan had studied, followed by a 15-day schedule in switzerland where some scenes and two songs were shot.


== soundtrack ==
music was composed by sriram parasuram and anuradha sriram.


== references ==