fiza is a 2000 indian hindi-language crime thriller film written and directed by khalid mohammed. it stars karisma kapoor in the title role, along with hrithik roshan as her terrorist brother and jaya bhaduri bachchan as their mother. the movie was produced by pradeep guha on a budget of 55 million and had a theatrical release worldwide on 8 september 2000.
upon release, fiza received positive reviews, with its storyline and soundtrack, as well as performances earning praise. a box office hit, the film earned 247 million worldwide. fiza received 7 nominations at the 46th filmfare awards including best actor for roshan; and won best actress for kapoor and best supporting actress for bachchan. it is still considered as one of kapoor's finest performances.


== plot ==
the film is about a girl, fiza (karisma kapoor), whose brother, amaan (hrithik roshan), disappears during the 1993 bombay riots. fiza and her mother nishatbi (jaya bachchan) desperately hold on to the hope that one day he will return. however, in 1999, six years after his disappearance, fiza, fed up of living with uncertainty, resolves to search of her brother. driven by her mother's fervent hope and her own determination, fiza decides to use whatever means she canthe law, media, and even politiciansto find her brother, which brings her into contact with various characters and situations.
when she does find him, to her horror she sees that he has joined a terrorist group. she forces him to come home, and he finally reunites with their mother. however, his allegiance and thoughts make him want to return to the terrorist network, led by murad khan (manoj bajpayee). a confrontation with two men who harass fiza leads amaan to revealing about his involvement with the terrorist network to his sister, mother, and the police. his mother's grief and disappointment eventually lead her to commit suicide.
fiza tries once more to find her brother, with the help of aniruddh (bikram saluja).
amaan is sent on a mission to kill two powerful politicians; when he does succeed in assassinating them, his own terrorist group tries to kill him. he escapes, and fiza follows him. they confront each other, and with the police closing in on him, amaan asks fiza to kill him. as a last resort to give him an honourable end, fiza kills her brother.


== cast ==
karishma kapoor ... fiza ikramullah
hrithik roshan ... amaan ikramullah
jaya bachchan ... nishatbi ikramullah
neha bajpayee ... shehnaz
asha sachdev ... ulfat
bikram saluja ... anirudh roy
isha koppikar ... gitanjali
johnny lever ... laughing club comic
manoj bajpai ... murad khan (guest appearance)
sushmita sen... reshma (special appearance in an item number "mehboob mere")
savita prabhune ... policewoman (special appearance)


== production ==
khalid mohamed originally wanted to have ram gopal varma direct this movie when he finished the script. although karisma kapoor plays hrithik roshan's older sister in this movie, he is 5 months older than her in real life. originally, the role played by roshan was supposed to be a minor one. but after kaho naa... pyaar hai became a blockbuster overnight, khalid mohammed panicked. he knew expectations were high because of hrithik, so he increased the length of his role. many scenes like his workout, and an extra song were added to suit hrithik's new status of a superstar. additionally, the film was set to be an artistic film. but khalid mohammed decided to commercialize the film due to pressure from the distributors. a dance number for kapoor was added, in addition to the park scene with johnny lever.


== reception ==
the film was critically acclaimed and did well at the box office. critics praised the lead performances. karisma kapoor in particular was applauded for her performance as a disillusioned sister. vinayak chakravorty from hindustan times gave the film 4 out of 5 stars, writing, "fiza is more than just about khalid mohamed's foray into film-making. it is about karisma kapoor's proving a point as an actress of some substance. it is about hrithik roshan's establishing that he doesn't need maximum footage or glitz to impress. it is about the return after a hiatus of the ever-delightful jaya bachchan." mimmy jain of the indian express, in a positive review, wrote, "fiza is the kind of movie that every critic prays will never come his way. for a critic's job, after all, is to criticize. and fiza offers little scope for criticism." she further noted karisma for delivering "a superbly flawless performance". sanjeev bariana of the tribune labelled the film "only a little above average", but was highly appreciative of the performances. suman tarafdar of filmfare gave a positive review of the film and kapoor's acting, and chaya unnikrishnan of screen praised the performances and concluded that fiza "does live upto the expectations". screen magazine's critic chaya unnikrishnan, while disappointed with the film's second half, described it as "a mature film" and commended the performances. dinesh raheja of india today praised the performances but concluded: "fiza remains watchable for its captivatingly-captured sequences within a close-knit family. but, the big picture it wants to capture remains underdeveloped."karisma kapoor won best actress and jaya bachchan won best supporting actress, while hrithik roshan was nominated for best actor at the 46th filmfare awards, but won for his performance on kaho naa... pyaar hai. kapoor and bachchan also won best actress and best supporting actress, respectively at the 2nd iifa awards.
fiza was also the main winner at the bfja awards in the hindi film section, winning best director for khalid mohammed, best actor for roshan, best actress for kapoor, and best supporting actress for bachchan.in may 2010, fiza was one of the 14 hindi films selected by the film society of lincoln center to be screened as part of a section called "muslim cultures of bombay cinema" which aims to "celebrate and explore the rich influence of muslim cultural and social traditions on the cinema of bombay to the present".fiza was banned from screening in malaysia.


== music ==
initially, a. r. rahman was approached to compose the music for the film, but he declined citing time constraints. however he agreed to compose one song which became "piya haji ali". he later composed for the director's next, tehzeeb. for the background score of fiza, rahman suggested his associate ranjit barot. barot composed the score and also composed the song mere watan, while the rest of the songs were composed by anu malik. the album was one of the most popular soundtracks of the year. it features popular songs like "aaja mahiya", "aankh milaoongi", "tu fiza hai" and "mehboob mere". "mehboob mere" was performed by sushmita sen as an item number. anu malik received a best music nomination at the 46th filmfare awards for his work on this album. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 25,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was one of the highest-selling of the year.


== awards and nominations ==


=== filmfare awards ===
won

best actress  karisma kapoor
best supporting actress  jaya bachchannominated

best actor  hrithik roshan
best music  anu malik
best lyricist  gulzar for "aaja mahiya"
best male playback  sonu nigam for "tu hawa hai"
best female playback  sunidhi chauhan for "mehboob mere"
best cinematography  santosh sivan


=== iifa awards ===
best actress  karisma kapoor
best supporting actress  jaya bachchan


=== bfja awards ===
best director  khalid mohammed
best actor  hrithik roshan
best actress  karisma kapoor
best supporting actress  jaya bachchan


=== sansui awards ===
best actress (jury) - karisma kapoor


== see also ==

list of highest-grossing bollywood films


== references ==


== external links ==
fiza at imdb