flesh gordon is a 1974 american sex comedy movie serving as a spoof of universal pictures's first (of three) flash gordon serial films from the 1930s. the movie was produced by walter r. cichy, bill osco, and howard ziehm. it was co-directed by ziehm and michael benveniste, who also wrote the screenplay. the cast includes jason williams, suzanne fields, and william dennis hunt. the movie was distributed by mammoth films.
the movie's plot is reminiscent of the first universal pictures flash gordonserial flash gordon (1936), but written and directed with a purposely campy flavor. the planet porno (in the serial: mongo) and major characters are suggestive innuendos: the hero flesh gordon (flash gordon); his love interest dale ardor (dale arden); the evil emperor wang the perverted (ming the merciless); scientist dr. flexi jerkoff (dr. alexi zarkov); seductive amora, queen of magic (ming's daughter aura); and effeminate prince precious (prince barin). the movie features production values comparable to the original serial, stop-motion animation of creatures, frequent use of gratuitous nudity, and brief sex scenes.


== plot ==
distinguished professor gordon (john hoyt) explains that earth is being tormented by periodic "sex rays", which send people into a sexual frenzy. when one of the rays hits the ford trimotor passenger aircraft carrying flesh gordon (jason williams) and dale ardor (suzanne fields), the pilots abandon the controls and everyone aboard has manic sex. when they finish, flesh and dale escape the imminent plane crash by parachute. they land near the workshop of flexi jerkoff (joseph hudgins), who has a plan to stop the sex rays at their source.
they travel to the planet porno aboard jerkoff's phallic rocket ship, and are briefly hit by a sex ray, resulting in a frantic three-way orgy. they crash land after being shot down by the minions of emperor wang (william dennis hunt) and are attacked by several one-eyed  penisauruses before being taken prisoner by wang's soldiers. they are brought before wang, who is presiding over a sex orgy of more than a dozen men and women. jerkoff is sent to work in wang's laboratory, while wang announces his intention to marry dale. flesh is sentenced to death, but is saved when queen amora (nora wieternik) takes him instead to be her sex slave.
wang shoots down amora's ship, and flesh is the only survivor. he is reunited with jerkoff, and they resume their efforts to defeat emperor wang, using amora's power pasties against his soldiers. wang and dale's wedding is interrupted when dale is kidnapped by amazonian lesbians, whose leader, chief nellie (candy samples), attempts to initiate dale into their sexual cult. flesh and jerkoff save her, unexpectedly aided by prince precious (mycle brandy) of the forest kingdom. with help from their new ally, jerkoff builds a weapon to destroy wang's sex ray. they confront him and trick his "rapist robots" into turning on him, but wang escapes, seeking the aid of the towering idol of the great god porno. porno comes to life and captures dale, blandly commenting all the time as they flee. jerkoff shoots the living idol, freeing dale and causing the god to fall on wang and the sex ray, killing them both. flesh, dale, and jerkoff are celebrated as heroes of the planet porno and return to the earth.


== cast ==
jason williams as flesh gordon
suzanne fields as dale ardor
joseph hudgins as dr. flexi jerkoff
william dennis hunt as emperor wang the perverted
john hoyt as professor gordon
candy samples as chief nellie
mycle brandy as prince precious
nora wieternik as amora, queen of magic
lance larsen as guard for emperor wang
robert v. greene (voice) as narrator
craig t. nelson (uncredited voice) as the great god porno


== production ==
flesh gordon was shot in 1971, and according to producer bill osco, cost $470,000 to make. osco intended to hold out for a major distributor to pay a $1 million advance to secure the american release rights.the movie initially was assigned a mpaa rating of x, but was then re-edited, receiving a reclassified rating of r. the original running time was 78 minutes, but the later, unrated "collector's edition" video release runs 90 minutes.
flesh gordon employed special effects artists who later gained hollywood fame, including mike minor, greg jein and rick baker. established effects artists jim danforth (listed backward in the credits as mij htrofnad) and dave allen also worked on the movie. the low-budget special effects were achieved using old-fashioned techniques: for example, the model of wang's palace was created using everyday objects, such as drinking glasses, and was designed to resemble griffith observatory so actual footage shot at the base of the observatory could be easily integrated into the movie.
los angeles-area star trek fan and writer bjo trimble was a makeup artist on flesh gordon; she described these experiences in her book on the good ship enterprise: my 15 years with star trek. other los angeles-area science fiction fans worked, at times, in various capacities on the film, including science fiction and fantasy artist george barr who designed and illustrated the movie's poster, and cornelius cole iii, who animated the opening title credits sequence. longtime fan and science fiction and fantasy writer tom reamy served in the  art department as the production's property master. he tracked down many of the screen-used props in the movie, including authentic, full-sized ford trimotor wicker passenger seats (matching the movie's tri-motor aircraft miniature) used in an early scene.
the towering creature was not originally intended to speak, but it proved so expressive that dialogue was dubbed over to match its mouth movements. addressed as the great god porno in this dialogue, the special effects crew named him nesuahyrrah, a tribute to stop-motion animation master ray harryhausen, spelling his name backwards.according to ziehm's dvd audio commentary, the movie was shot using scenes of straight and gay hardcore pornography. these were cut after ziehm found himself in legal trouble: producing pornography in los angeles was legally viewed as pandering at that time. the x-rated footage was surrendered to l.a. vice police. although some explicit shots can be briefly seen during wang's throne room orgy scenes, the "collector's edition" video, labelled "the original, uncensored version", is no more explicit than any of the earlier video releases.
also according to ziehm's dvd audio commentary, universal studios was planning to sue graffiti productions over the first part of flesh gordon being too similar to the first chapter of universal's 1936 flash gordon serial film that it bordered on plagiarism. to avoid a lawsuit, ziehm added an opening text scroll that stated that flesh gordon was a burlesque style parody of the depression era superheroes of america's past; he also added "not to be confused with the original flash gordon" to all advertising materials.


== critical reception ==
vivian sobchack commented that flesh gordon is "a skin flick hilariously molded around the flash gordon serials, and fully and lovingly aware of genre conventions from special effects to dialogue".the movie was nominated for the 1975 hugo award for best dramatic presentation (the only indie production nominated that year), but lost to mel brooks' young frankenstein.rotten tomatoes gives flesh gordon a "fresh" rating of 67%.


== legacy ==
the sequel flesh gordon meets the cosmic cheerleaders was released in 1990.
a four-issue comic book, written by daniel wilson and published by aircel comics, was published in 1992.famous flesh gordon's was a strip club operating in london, ontario. the club was closed in 2015 after the provincial government revoked its liquor license due to the owner's connection with the hells angels.


== see also ==
list of american films of 1974


== references ==


== external links ==
flesh gordon at imdb
flesh gordon at the tcm movie database
flesh gordon at rotten tomatoes
flesh gordon on the encyclopedia of fantastic film and television (eofftv)
bizarro masterpiece theatre review (the second supper)