footpath is a 1953 hindi film written and directed by zia sarhadi. the film stars dilip kumar, meena kumari, and anwar hussain. the music of the film is by khayyam and background score by timir baran.


== plot ==
the story is about black-marketeering in grains and medicines, a subject of perennial interest to everybody and of poignant importance to the poor and needy. the characters and drama are laid among the very poor, the homeless ones, the pavement dwellers, whence the picture derives its title. one of them, the central character, is a poorly-paid hack journalist named noshu who lives, for lack of means, with his kindly elder brother bani and banis nasty wife, minna. powerfully attracted to a pretty young girl of the neighborhood and wanting desperately to woo and win her, he decides to become a black-marketeer.
the path of the transgressor is laid with roses. he mints money, becomes a wealthy and a respected citizen, and has everything he hankered for in his new world of luxurious ease. it all turns to ashes in his mouth. his brother, who brought him up and who has lost his teachers job because he used the schools money to finance noshus first flutter, turns him out when he discovers what the money was for. so do his poor but honest friends.
with a hardened heart, noshu goes his own way, becoming more wealthy at each step. awakening comes with the outbreak of an epidemic among the starving poor. with his racket in medicines, noshus conscience stirs in him as he sees the people he loved agonize and die for lack of the drugs he is hoarding for peak prices. the climax comes in his soul when he rushes to his stricken brothers side too late and arrives just as bani breathes his last. shocked into realization, noshu repents, gives himself up to the police, denounces his companions in crime and goes to prison.


== critical reception ==
footpath is one of the films featured in avijit ghosh's book, 40 retakes: bollywood classics you may have missed


== cast ==
dilip kumar as noshu
meena kumari as mala
romesh thapar
anwar hussain
achala sachdev
sumati lajmi
ramesh thakur
maruti rao
kuldeep akhtar
p. kailash
jankidas
jagdeep
s. k. prem
habib tanvir
kamalesh thakkar
umakant
master romi as monu
zia sarhadi


== soundtrack ==


== external links ==
footpath at imdb