for those who think young is a 1964 beach party film shot in techniscope, directed by leslie h. martinson and featuring james darren, pamela tiffin, paul lynde, tina louise, bob denver, nancy sinatra, robert middleton, ellen burstyn (billed as ellen mcrae), claudia martin and woody woodbury.


== plot ==
rich kid and party animal gardner pruitt iii (james darren), known as "ding" to his friends, is on the prowl for a new conquest in the form of teenager sandy palmer (pamela tiffin). in the meantime, ding's influential grandfather, b.s. cronin (robert middleton) wants to curtail the romance and shut down a popular local college teen hangout.
sandy's guardians sid hoyt (paul lynde) and woody woodbury (playing himself) get mixed up in the proceedings, with woody becoming the college kid's hero at the hangout. that sends up a red flag to the college administration, which sends in dr. pauline swenson to investigate allegations of underage drinking.
when the clever kids discover that ex-gangster grandpa cronin used to be a bootlegger, they blackmail him into keeping the club open.


== cast ==
james darren 	... 	gardner 'ding' pruitt iii
pamela tiffin 	... 	sandy palmer
paul lynde         ... 	uncle sid hoyt
tina louise 	... 	topaz mcqueen
bob denver 	... 	kelp
nancy sinatra 	... 	karen cross
robert middleton 	... 	burford b. sanford 'nifty' cronin
claudia martin 	... 	sue lewis
ellen burstyn 	... 	dr. pauline swenson (billed as ellen mcrae)
woody woodbury 	... 	uncle woody woodbury
louis quinn 	... 	gus kestler
sammee tong 	... 	clyde
jimmy griffin  ...  singer
george raft  ...  detective lieutenant
roger smith  ...  smitty the detective
addison richards  ...  dean watkins
paul 'mousie' garner  ...  mousie
benny baker  ...  lou
anna lee  ...  laura pruitt
jack la rue  ...  cronin's business associate
allen jenkins  ...  col. leslie jenkins
robert armstrong  ...  norman armstrong


== production ==


=== "for those who think young" ===
in 1961 pepsi cola decided to change their slogan from "be sociable" (which had been used since 1958) to "now it's pepsi for those who think young". they did the launch as part of a $34 million campaign.


=== production ===
the film began as a script called a young man's fancy. the rights were bought by frank sinatra's essex productions. dolores hart was going to star. then james darren and ann-margret were going to star. pamela tiffin replaced ann margret.
the title was changed to for those who think young in order to tie it in with pepsi. finance was obtained from united artists.
director leslie h. martinson was chosen for his fast-paced work on warner bros. television as the film's production was just 18 days.
it featured the film debuts of nancy sinatra and claudia martin (daughter of dean martin) as well as a leading role for nightclub comedian woody woodbury, then the host of television's who do you trust?. ellen burstyn, who plays the part of dr. pauline swenson, is listed in the credits as ellen mcrae, and famous surfer mickey dora is a college boy extra.
it was george raft's first movie in four years.filming started august 14, 1963 at paramount studios.all the beach scenes were shot at mailbu beach in one day.the white semi-convertible that james darren's character drives is a radically restyled stock $18,000 1963 buick riviera, designed by burbank customizer george barris originally to be his personal car.the film was notable for extensive product placement for pepsi cola and several other companies, including jax clothing, baskin-robbins, peter pan swimswear, buick and honda.sam arkoff of aip later called the use of the title "the most ridiculous, hidebound, stupid concept i can think of. to put a midde aged slogan on a youth picture. what kid would go to see a film called for those who think young?"


== music ==
jerry fielding, later famous for his television themes, composed the score for the film.
mack david and jerry livingston wrote "for those who think love", sung by james darren over the opening credits.
bob denver sings "ho daddy, surf's up" and "ho daddy, surf's up (reprise)."
jimmy griffin (later founder member of the 1970s band bread), performs the song "i'm gonna walk all over this land", accompanied by paul johnson (of the bel-airs), glen grey and richard delvy (both of the challengers).


== references ==


== external links ==
for those who think young at imdb