force is a 2011 indian hindi-language action thriller film directed by nishikant kamat, starring john abraham, genelia d'souza and the debutant vidyut jammwal. it is a remake of gautham menon's successful 2003 tamil film, kaakha kaakha  starring suriya and jyothika in lead and is about a dutiful cop who chases the capture of a dreaded gangster. the film released on 30 september 2011, and received mostly positive reviews upon release,. john abraham's performance was also praised by public and critics. its sequel force 2 has been released in 2016, making it the first installment of the force film series.


== plot ==
the film starts with acp yashvardhan. ips (john abraham) in the hospital, recalling the accident that changed his life forever. yash is a dutiful, responsible and stone-hearted police officer in the narcotics control bureau whose only passion in life is crime-fighting. he has no family or loved ones and has been alone in life since he can remember. everything changes when yash meets maya (genelia d'souza), an independent and lovely woman. though the two get off to a rocky start, maya warms up to him once she realises he is a police officer, and apologises for the misunderstandings they had. when maya gets hit by a car in front of yash, he rushes her to the hospital. with that, the two bond and start to meet and go out regularly. maya confesses her love to yash, but yash refutes her advances, as he does not want her to become his weakness in his professional life. however, swati (sandhya mridul), the wife of yash's co-worker and good friend, convinces yash that he is in love with maya as well and yash decides to marry her.
in the big drug case the unit is investigating, yash, along with officers from the narcotics control bureau, dsp mahesh pande (ameet m gaur) who is transferred on special duty from the new delhi income tax department, dsp atul kalseka (mohnish bahl) and inspector kamlesh, kills reddy (mukesh rishi) while he is peddling drugs. yash, mahesh and kamlesh are suspended for killing reddy instead of arresting him. reddy's heartless and aggressive brother vishnu (vidyut jammwal) vows to avenge his brother's death by killing all of the officers. yash and the other officers prepare themselves for vishnu, but vishnu and his henchmen successfully break into mahesh's home and brutally murders him and his wife rachana (anaitha nair). the event leaves yash and the other officers shaken but yash and maya's marriage take place. meanwhile, vishnu decides to attack each of the officers' weaknesses; he kidnaps swati, atul's wife, and atul is forced to tell him where yash will be that night. yash and maya consummate their marriage; however, this proves to be their first and last night together.
yash is shot and maya is kidnapped in the attack. yash miraculously survives the attack. vishnu tells atul that he will release swati if atul kills yash. however, atul cannot bring himself to kill his friend and instead joins forces with yash to execute a plan against vishnu and save swati and maya. they find that vishnu has been keeping maya and swati hostage and find, in horror, that swati has been murdered. in despair and heartbreak, atul kills himself after seeing swati's body. yash and kamlesh go together and face vishnu in a final confrontation. kamlesh is shot but survives. vishnu shoots maya in front of yash and drops her from the second floor. yash catches her but is unable to save her. maya assures yash that she has gotten her wish of being with him and dies in yash's arms. anger and sorrow build up in yash and he brutally finishes off vishnu, exacting his revenge.
at the end, yash is shown living alone again, having returned to his professional life. kamlesh calls yash and tells him that he has found a new informer. yash turns to maya's photo before leaving and says that he'll be coming home late.


== cast ==
john abraham as acp yashvardhan "yash" singh, maya's husband
genelia d'souza as maya yashvardhan singh, yash's wife
vidyut jammwal as vishnu reddy, vijay's brother and the main antagonist
raj babbar as mahesh singh rajput ips, zonal director of mumbai ncb, yash's boss
mohnish bahl as atul kalsekar, swati's husband
mukesh rishi as vijay reddy (anna), vishnu's brother
kamlesh sawant as kamlesh sawant
sandhya mridul as swati kalsekar, atul's wife
anaitha nair as rachana
saksham dayma as bala
ninad kamat as vasu
ameet m gaur as mahesh
shashank shende as arvind
parineeta borthakur as maya's sister


== character map ==


== production ==


=== development ===
in july 2004, gautham menon agreed terms to direct a version of kaakha kaakha in hindi with sunny deol in the lead role and revealed that the script was written five years ago with deol in mind, but the film eventually failed to take off. producer vipul shah approached him to direct the hindi version of the film in 2010 as force with john abraham and katrina kaif, and menon initially agreed before pulling out again. he cited that he felt the eight years gap between the releases of it with the original was too long; subsequently nishikant kamat of evano oruvan and mumbai meri jaan fame was roped in by the producers to direct the remake. initially, asin was signed up to reprise her role that she played in the telugu remake of the film  gharshana, but as the film became delayed, dates clashed with her other film, ready, hence she was forced to withdraw from the film. she was consequently replaced by genelia. the villain was chosen as vidyut jamwal, a model turned actor who had reportedly won the role from 500 other people who were originally considered. he had to undergo strenuous training to build a body that could be comparable to the hero of the film.


=== filming ===
the shooting of the film ended in february 2011, after sixty five days of shoot. during the filming, john abraham stated that "with nishikant i have discovered the magic of raw action, but what is even more beautiful is the romance in 'force'. this i believe will be my first pan india film after a long gap." the film involved tough stunts which allan amin, who worked with john abraham earlier in dhoom, had choreographed.


=== controversy ===
controversy broke out for the film, in a scene where john and genelia were being married. sources claim that the ceremony conducted was so authentic that had they completed the last round they would have actually been man and wife. again, following the reports of ritesh deshmukh and genelia's marriage plans, the priest insisted that the couple could not marry as genelia is already married to john.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack is composed by harris jayaraj, which is his second album in hindi after his successful album rehna hai tere dil mein (2001). "khwabon khwabon" was reused from the song "uyirin uyire" in the original film kaakha kaakha and "main chali" was reused from the song "manasa" in munna, both of which were composed by harris jayaraj; the lyrics were penned by javed akhtar. the track "dum hai toh aaja" was composed by lalit pandit. sameer phaterpekar composed the film's background score. the soundtrack album featuring five tracks was released by t-series on 24 august 2011.


=== track listing ===
all lyrics are written by javed akhtar.


=== reception ===
joginder tuteja of bollywood hungama gave 3 out of 5 stars and said "force delivers as promised and turns out to be an impressive soundtrack. while 'khwabon khwabon' was anyway expected to be the usp of the soundtrack, 'main chali' turns out to be another number that works quite well for the soundtrack. overall, an album that has a potential to turn much bigger if the film too turns out to be a good success." tanuj manchanda of planet bollywood gave 7 out of 10 and quoted in his review that "after hearing all songs, one can say that this is undoubtedly one of the best albums of the year both in terms of lyrics and compositions. harris jayaraj has proved his mettle time and again and this time also he succeeds with flying colours. javed akhtar as usual is dedicated towards giving his best. and the best part of the album is that all songs except 'dum hai to aaja' are soulful and a treat for all music lovers and does not have any remixes to rob off the impact. force is definitely recommended!" devesh sharma at filmfare awarded it 3 out of 5 stars and quoted "overall, jayraj has arrived on the hindi music scene and one looks forward to hearing more of his original tunes (and not reprises) in future." komal nahta of koimoi.com stated that, "the songs have not become as popular as they are nice. javed akhtar's lyrics are appropriate."


== release ==
the film released on 30 september 2011. the film is john abraham's biggest opening for a release up-to date.


=== critical response ===
dna india rated the movie by giving 4 out of 5 stars stating that "force is high voltage action". the times of india gave force 3 and half stars out of 5, asking all gods of war enthusiasts to go for the film. on the contrary, the deccan chronicle gave 2 and half stars out of 5 and wrote, " force doesnt live up to its titleat all". hamara bollywood gave the film 3 out of 5 stars saying "in the category of action movies, force just might be the best one of the year". komal nahta of koimoi.com also rated 2.5 out of 5 stars. komal nahta further stated that "on the whole, force will be liked by the youngsters, especially guys. in the final tally, it will prove to be an above-average fare, thanks to the impressive start all over". mayank shekhar of hindustan times gave 2 stars out of 5 concluding that, "force is hardly a force to reckon with".


=== box office ===
upon release, the film opened to decent start at the domestic box office and packed cinema halls, "witnessing 100% occupancy across shows", according to boxofficeindia.com. the film grossed 48.4 million (us$680,000) in india on the first day. force has fared well, despite number of screens and shows being limited. it collected approx rs 245.2 millionnett in week 1. breakdown:- fri 50.5 million sat 47.5 million sun 62.0 million mon 24.2 million tue 21.5 million wed 21.0 million thu 18.5 million force is john's biggest opener, in solo lead. the film dropped on monday but then held steady collections through the weekdays but the collections were low. force fell heavily in its second weekend taking an 85% fall from its first, it collected 20 million nett which took its ten-day business to 235.0 million nett. moreover, force had a poor opening of around $500,000 in overseas. the opening figures from united kingdom were 65,000, north america $100,000, uae $160,000 and australia $60,000. the movie collected 347.2 million in india and was declared "above average" by boxofficeindia.com.


== sequel ==
producer vipul shah planned a sequel to this film. the film titled force 2  started shooting close to september 2015 and was released in november 2016 . the film was directed by abhinay deo.sonakshi sinha played a raw agent in the sequel. sonakshi announced this news on twitter on saturday 11 july 2015.
"yep yep! told you i had news for you... super excited to be playing a raw agent in my next film  force 2," she posted.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
force at imdb