four sisters and a wedding is a 2013 filipino comedy-drama film directed by cathy garcia-molina. the film features star cinema's most prominent young actresses: toni gonzaga, bea alonzo, angel locsin and shaina magdayao, as the four sisters attempting to stop the wedding of their younger brother played by enchong dee. actress angelica panganiban was originally part of the main cast but was pulled out and was replaced by shaina magdayao.
the film is part of star cinema's 20th anniversary presentation in collaboration with rebisco's 50th anniversary. four sisters and a wedding was released in the philippines on june 26, 2013, and internationally on july 5, 2013.


== plot ==
when cj, the youngest of the family, announced that he is getting married, his sister, gabbie, convinces the other sisters to come back home for the wedding as requested by their mother grace (connie reyes). teddie (toni gonzaga), the eldest, is working as a waitress and housekeeper in madrid; the second sister bobbie (bea alonzo), works as a corporate communications manager in new york and is living with her boyfriend tristan (sam milby) and his daughter trixie; the third sister alex (angel locsin) is living independently and works as a film director; while gabbie (shaina magdayao) is a school teacher.
bobbie, having a difficult relationship with trixie, is pressured by the eagerness of tristan to get married. alex, on the other hand, is having a hard time with her filmmaking gig as well as her relationship with bobbie's ex, chad (bernard palanca). meanwhile, teddie has not earned enough to buy a plane ticket, so she asked help from her housekeeping colleague, frodo (janus del prado), and convinced him to go back to manila together and pretend that they are a couple.
when the family reunites, the sisters expressed their opinion on cj's abrupt decision of getting married, offending him. cj accepted their apology, but told them to behave themselves for when they meet his fiance, princess (angeline quinto), and her family, the bayags.
at the bayags' villa, the sisters were taken aback when princess's father asks him to sign a prenuptial agreement. appalled, the sisters decided to formulate a plan to stop the wedding from happening. when bobbie suggests that cj is only marrying princess because she was "the best candidate in a diminishing pool of options", teddie asks their housekeeper, toti marie (cecil paz), to introduce cj to a lot of girls. toti marie came up with a boys night out with hookers, and the plan to change cj's mind about the wedding failed.
while the boys were getting sober, princess arrived at the salazars to surprise the family for breakfast. alex invited chad over, which made the whole moment awkward, especially for bobbie. the following day, as tristan was about to leave overseas for business, he tells bobbie that by the time he gets back, she should now be willing to marry him.
meanwhile, teddie and frodo went on to one of the bayags family businesses - a spa that has an obscene tag line and offers a happy ending to their customers. thinking that theyd be able to find anomalies, teddie asked frodo to avail one of the services. as frodo was moaning in one of the massage areas, teddie immediately called the police to have the area inspected. they found out that the happy ending was in fact, thinking of happy thoughts after a massage.
jeanette (carmi martin) arrived at the scene and threatened to have the salazars investigated. on the way home, teddie, troubled that her secrets might surface, had an argument with frodo because he suggested that she should just admit it that she is not really working as a teacher in spain.
cj confronted his sisters about the spa incident and assured them that the wedding will take place no matter what, when cj went to his room furiously bobbie confronted teddie for continuing her plan but failed leading to an argument to the sisters when grace arrived and asked what's going on, gabbie and alex immediately convinced her that their playing charades. later that evening, bobbie saw chad flirting with another woman while buying condoms at a convenience store.
the following morning, bobbie talked to alex about what she saw, but they ended up arguing. teddie asks frodo for forgiveness. when she returned home, she was welcomed by the bayags who came over to show the gowns for the wedding. the salazars did not like them, so honey boy (boboy garovillo) decided that they play charades - wherein the family who wins gets to decide what gowns to wear.
during the game, the bayags kept on pointing hints that teddie is a maid (this also indicates that whether they're true to their words about investigating the salazars or getting back at teddie for finding loopholes in their business.) while on one part of the game the bayags pointed on bobbie as a "maid in manhattan." comparing the two but as the game goes the bayags kept on pointing to teddie, noticing this grace immediately disrupted them and had the bayags leave for insulting her daughter inside their own home, but before the bayags leave grace furiously and sarcastically insulted jeanette for having a fake botox face, plastic breast upgrades and a fake accent that she uses. jeanette mentioned before leaving that her "fake" breasts are real and teddie is a maid in spain. grace confronted teddie about it, who admitted that when spain was in crisis, she was one of the teachers who was laid off. teddie was afraid of herself if they will find out that she's actually a maid in spain. teddie thought of her as the eldest sibling, that she has to be the best example but she emotionally admitted that she didn't achieve the dream in life that grace wanted for her, and teddie emotionally admitted that she will be the least successful of all the siblings and admitted that she will never be which turns the attention to the other sibling. the confrontation also opened the opportunity to discuss their families and the envy that the sisters feel with one another, specifically bobbie whom she gently and emotionally told grace about her favorite kids in the family. bobbie explained to the family about why she went to new york, not because of her desires but because to help the family which is struggling with finances. at that time she also explained how not easy her life was and the personalities she developed while she was in new york because she needed to be like, despite the loneliness and hardships she experienced, bobbie stay true to her words and stay in new york. she told grace about her unforgettable memories of what she thought that grace's favorite is teddie despite of striving for being the best of the best. bobbie told the family who are the favorites of their parents in the siblings, and lastly, bobbie admitted that she wishes that she has some of her siblings' attitudes; this includes cj's innocence and charm, gabbie's maternal instincts, alex's adventurous attitude and teddie's sense of humor. upon hearing her struggles trixie now understands bobbie's situation and drops her spoiled brat attitude towards her. in the end, they all hugged each other and found peace.
the following day, alex and bobbie spoke to one another sincerely and theyve decided that alex should confront chad and end things, after talking to each other alex and bobbie decided to go to the bar where chad and mocha were. alex confronted chad for cheating on her and how he broke bobbie's heart just as the sisters are about to leave, in turn, mocha insulted alex causing her to be dragged by alex out of the bar and being restrained by teddie and gabbie. chad wanted to ease the situation but cj stopped him to cause furthermore. later that day, the sisters surprised grace with piled crackers as a gift for her when suddenly, cj called in to inform them that princesss grandfather died. the family then went to express their condolences and they apologized for all the troubles that they have brought in their respective families.
due to a filipino cultural superstition, cj and princesss wedding did not push through. in order for the preparations and expenses not to go to waste, bobbie used it as a chance to fulfill tristans dream of marrying her.


== cast ==


=== main cast ===
toni gonzaga as theodora grace "teddie" salazar
bea alonzo as roberta olivia "bobbie" salazar-harris
angel locsin as alexandra camille "alex" salazar
shaina magdayao as gabriella sophia "gabbie" salazar
enchong dee as carlos jose "cj/rebreb" salazar


=== supporting cast ===
coney reyes as grace salazar
sam milby as tristan harris
angeline quinto as princess antoinette may bayag
carmi martin as jeanette bayag
boboy garovillo as honey boy bayag
janus del prado as frodo teodoro
bernard palanca as chad quinto
vangie labalan as manang
joy viado as sassa
cecil paz as toti marie/ tina marie
samantha faytaren as trixie harris
juan rodrigo as mr. carlos "caloy" salazar (voice and photo appearances only) (uncredited)
mocha uson as herself


== soundtrack ==
the film's soundtrack was salamat, which was written by christian martinez, and performed by richard yap. the said song was also used in the celebration of rebisco's (the film's sponsor) 50th anniversary.


== accolades ==


== prequel ==

on february 27, 2020, star cinema announced that the film will be getting a prequel entitled "four sisters before the wedding". the prequel will also be directed by giselle andres, an assistant director in the original film, however, mae cruz-alviar replaced her instead, and it
will be set during the salazar siblings' teenage years. the prequel will star charlie dizon, alexa ilacad, gillian vicencio, and belle mariano as teddie, bobbie, alex, and gabbie, respectively. it will be produced by scx, a new sub brand under abs-cbn films, star cinema.


== references ==


== external links ==
four sisters and a wedding at imdb