framed is a 1975 american crime neo noir directed by phil karlson and starring joe don baker and conny van dyke. it was the final film of karlson's hollywood career.


== plot ==
returning home to tennessee from a trip to texas, nightclub owner and gambler ron lewis happens across a shooting and is nearly shot himself.  a deputy confronts lewis as he arrives at his home.  he accuses lewis of being involved in the shooting and roughs him up, resulting in a fight that ends up in the deputy being killed and lewis being badly beaten. lewis is  placed under arrest for the death of the deputy.
corrupt cops, including a thieving sheriff, and lawyers (including his own) ignore lewis' claim of self-defense and railroad him into a prison sentence of up to 10 years. his girlfriend susan is sexually assaulted and warned not to aid lewis' defense in any way.
behind bars, lewis is befriended by mob boss sal viccarone and hit man vince greeson. he is paroled after four years and immediately sets out to get even with those who wronged him. vince, also out of prison, is contracted to kill lewis, but decides to help him instead, as does a law-abiding deputy, sam perry.
lewis proceeds to torment and even torture the guilty parties in a number of ways, gaining his revenge and finding out the truth about what really happened the night of the roadside shooting.


== cast ==
joe don baker as ron lewis
conny van dyke as susan barrett
gabriel dell as vince greeson
john marley as sal viccarrone
brock peters as sam perry
john larch as bundy
warren j. kemmerling as morello (as warren kemmerling)
paul mantee as frank
walter brooke as senator tatum
joshua bryant as andrew ney
hunter von leer as dewey
les lannom as gary
h. b. haggerty as bickford
hoke howell as decker
lawrence montaigne as deputy allison
red west as mallory
brenton banks as jeremiah
ken lester as big jim
henry o. arnold as lenny
gary gober as kenny
lloyd tatum as deputy wilson
roy jenson as haskins


== see also ==
list of american films of 1975


== references ==


== external links ==
framed at imdb