freddy vs. jason is a 2003 american slasher film directed by ronny yu and written by damian shannon and mark swift. the film, a crossover between a nightmare on elm street franchise and friday the 13th franchise, retroactively establishes them in a shared universe and pits iconic horror film antagonists freddy krueger and jason voorhees against each other. it is the last film in each series before their respective reboots, a sequel to both freddy's dead: the final nightmare (1991) and jason goes to hell: the final friday (1993), being the eighth in the a nightmare on elm street franchise and the eleventh in the friday the 13th franchise.
freddy vs. jason was released in the united states on august 15, 2003. it grossed over $116 million worldwide, making it the highest-grossing film in both the friday the 13th and nightmare on elm street series. the film marks robert englund's final cinematic appearance as freddy krueger.


== plot ==
freddy krueger, now powerless in hell because the residents of springwood have forgotten about him, uses his remaining powers to resurrect jason voorhees. freddy appears to jason in the form of his mother to manipulate him into killing the denizens of springwood to create fear, allowing freddy to regain his strength.
meanwhile, lori campbell, who lives with her widowed father, has a sleepover with her friends kia and gibb. they are later joined by trey, gibb's boyfriend, and his friend blake. jason enters the house and kills trey, and the police suspect freddy. after a nightmare, blake awakens to find his father killed before jason then kills blake himself. the police call it a murdersuicide the following day, hoping to conceal freddy's return from the rest of the town.
elsewhere, lori's ex-boyfriend will rollins and his friend mark davis, who are institutionalized at the westin hills psychiatric hospital, are made to take hypnocil to suppress their dreams because of their previous contact with freddy. a news report about the springwood killings prompts them to escape and return to the town to warn lori about freddy. that night, lori and the others attend a rave in a cornfield. freddy tries to kill gibb in a nightmare, but jason kills her first in the real world after attacking the rave; angering freddy.
will, lori, and kia escape the rave with school nerd charlie linderman and stoner bill freeburg. deputy scott stubbs makes contact with lori and her friends, who deduce freddy's plan. learning about hypnocil, they try to steal it from westin hills; however freddy possesses freeburg, using him to dispose of the medicine. jason then arrives and kills stubbs, however freddy uses the possessed freeburg to tranquilize jason, causing him to fall asleep.
the teens devise a plan to pull freddy from the dream world into reality and force him to fight jason, bringing the unconscious jason to the now-abandoned camp crystal lake. freddy fights jason in the dream world, where he discovers that jason has a fear of water as a result of his death by drowning. he uses water to make jason powerless, however lori goes to sleep to save jason. jason awakens at the real camp crystal lake and pursues the teens, killing linderman. lori is awakened and pulls freddy into the real world, where he is confronted by jason.
freddy and jason fight throughout the campgrounds, with jason killing kia in the process and severing freddy's arm. lori and will set the dock on fire, making propane tanks explode and throwing freddy and jason into the lake. freddy climbs out and tries to kill lori and will, but he is impaled by a wounded jason with freddy's own clawed arm and is then decapitated by lori with jason's machete. jason and freddy then fall into the lake, both seemingly dead. after throwing the machete into the lake, lori and will leave the scene. 
the following morning, a victorious jason emerges from the water, holding freddy's severed head. however, freddy's head suddenly winks at the camera as his laughter is heard in the background, implying he is still alive.


== cast ==

additionally, evangeline lilly had a walk-on role as a high-school student. professional wrestler scar gutirrez, better known by his ring name rey mysterio, was englund's stunt double for a scene in freddy's boiler room lair. new line cinema studio chief robert shaye, who produced every preceding nightmare on elm street film, played the school principal (credited as l.e. moko).


== production ==


=== development ===
influenced by fan desire for a crossover film with a fight between freddy and jason, new line and paramount tried to make a freddy vs. jason movie in 1987 but could not agree on a story. when friday the 13th part viii: jason takes manhattan failed at the box office, sean cunningham wanted to reacquire the rights to friday the 13th and begin working with new line cinema on freddy vs. jason (new line owned nightmare on elm street). paramount and new line wanted the license to the other's character so they could control a crossover film. negotiations on the project collapsed, and paramount made jason takes manhattan. after friday the 13th part viii: jason takes manhattan was released in 1989, the rights reverted to scuderi, minasian, and barsamianto (who sold them to new line). before cunningham could begin to work on freddy vs. jason, wes craven returned to new line to make new nightmare. this put freddy vs. jason on hold, but allowed cunningham to bring jason back with jason goes to hell: the final friday. the ninth installment "turned a healthy profit". cunningham's "frustration" with the delayed development of freddy vs. jason led him to create jason x to keep the series alive. based on jason takes manhattan's concept of taking jason away from crystal lake, the tenth film put the titular character in space. the film lost its biggest supporter with the resignation of president of production michael de luca. lack of support let the finished film sit for two years before it was released on april 26, 2002. it was the series' lowest-grossing film at the domestic box office, and had the largest budget of any of the films to date. new line spent a reported $6 million on script development alone from several different writers. cyrus voris & ethan reiff were commissioned by de luca alongside lewis abernathy & sean s. cunningham. neither draft was well liked by the studio so brannon braga & ronald d. moore were hired to bring the project in a new direction. david j. schow was given an offer to write the script because he just happened to walk by de luca's office one day. david s. goyer and james dale robinson both subsequently rewrote the voris/reiff draft. rob bottin, known for his make-up work on the thing and total recall, was selected to direct the film in 1997. mark verheiden entered the project in the late '90s and proposed releasing the film with two different endings; one with freddy winning and one with jason winning. peter briggs, jason x writer todd farmer and screenwriting duo jonathan aibel & glenn berger were all later brought in to write for the film. newcomers mark swift & damian shannon were hired after delivering a pitch that de luca was happy with. goyer returned to the project once again in an effort to trim "every ounce of fat" from swift & shannon's 120 page script. according to swift and shannon, several endings were considered for the film; one involved pinhead of the hellraiser franchise, but new line did not want to secure the rights for the character.


=== casting jason ===
new line, thinking that freddy vs. jason needed a fresh start, chose a different actor to play jason. cunningham disagreed with their decision, believing that kane hodder was the best choice for the role. although hodder received a script for freddy vs. jason and met with director ronny yu and new line executives, yu and matthew barry felt that the role should be recast to fit yu's image of jason. hodder said that new line did not give him a reason for the recasting; according to yu, however, he wanted a taller, slower and more-deliberate jason. the role went to ken kirzinger, a canadian stuntman who worked on jason takes manhattan. yu said that kirzinger was hired because he was taller than robert englund, who played freddy krueger. kirzinger is 6 feet 5 inches (196 cm) tall, compared to the 6-foot-3-inch (191 cm) hodder, and yu wanted a much taller actor than the 5-foot-9-inch (175 cm) englund. kirzinger believed that his experience on part viii (doubling for hodder in two scenes) and his height helped him land the part. new line did not cast kirzinger until they saw him on film, and his first scene was jason walking down elm street. douglas tait played jason in a re-shot ending: 

unfortunately for me, it was the only scene i was hired to do. the test audiences were confused about the original ending, they thought jason ritter's character was becoming jason [sic]. you can see it in the deleted scenes, that is why they decided to re-shoot the ending. originally i was being considered for playing the role of jason in the entire film. it was actually between me and ken. when they took the film to canada, i was out of luck. there was no way they were going to pay for my flight and hotel stay when ken was a local. also, ken is older than me and he was a lot more established in the business than i was at the time ... i was on the film for a couple days. the water sequence took a lot of preparation. they realized that when i got wet, i looked too skinny in the clothes, so they had to bulk me up with pads and extra clothing so it would look like i was still big. being with all this extra weight, one eye covered, a machete in one hand, freddy's head in another hand, and being totally submerged in water, made that scene very difficult. also, ronny yu wanted me to walk like i was walking on land. he wanted it to look like i could walk through the water without it making me rise to the surface. to do this effect, they had a rope tied under water that i held onto with my left hand (with freddy's severed head in it also), and i held myself down on the ground so i could pull myself and walk forward.


== music ==


== release ==


=== home media ===
the film was released on vhs and dvd as part of new line's platinum series on january 13, 2004. the dvd release contained a second disc of bonus content with audio commentary by ronny yu, ken kirzinger and robert englund; deleted and alternate scenes with commentary; ill nio's music video for "how can i live"; trailers and tv ads, soundtrack promotion and behind-the-scenes featurettes. the film was released on october 4, 2005 on universal media disc and september 8, 2009 on blu-ray; the blu-ray release had the same content as the platinum series dvd.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
on rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 41% based on 162 reviews and an average rating of 4.98/10. the website's critical consensus reads, "fans of the two horror franchises will enjoy this showdown. but for everyone else, it's the same old slice and dice." on metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 37 out of 100 based on 29 reviews, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". audiences polled by cinemascore gave it an average grade of b+ on an a+-to-f scale.


=== accolades ===
doug chapman and glenn ennis were nominated for the best fire stunt award at the taurus world stunt awards 2004 for the double full-body burn and wire stunt. chapman doubled for robert englund as freddy and ennis doubled for ken kirzinger as jason in the stunt. the film was also nominated for best horror film at the saturn awards.


== other media ==


=== novelization ===
black flame published a novelization of the film on july 29, 2003.


== references ==


== sources ==
bracke, peter (2006), crystal lake memories: the complete history of friday the 13th, titan books, isbn 978-1845763435
grove, david (2005), making friday the 13th: the legend of camp blood, fab press, isbn 978-1903254318


== external links ==
freddy vs. jason at imdb
freddy vs. jason title listing at the internet speculative fiction database
freddy vs. jason at box office mojo
freddy vs. jason at rotten tomatoes
freddy vs. jason at allmovie
freddy vs. jason at metacritic
film page at the camp crystal lake web site
film page at fridaythe13thfilms.com
freddy vs. jason at nightmare on elm street companion