freedom radio  (a.k.a. a voice in the night) is a 1941 british propaganda film directed by anthony asquith and starring clive brook, diana wynyard, raymond huntley and derek farr. it is set in nazi germany during the second world war and concerns an underground german resistance group who run a radio station broadcasting against the totalitarian third reich.
it was shot at shepperton studios. the film's sets were designed by the art director paul sheriff.


== plot ==
an eminent viennese doctor in germany becomes increasingly disillusioned with the oppressive brutality of the nazis. his wife, however, is flattered by the attentions of the fhrer, and accepts a political post in berlin. at first the doctor does nothing as his friends "disappear", but eventually, with the aid of an engineer, he creates a secret radio station from which  he broadcasts condemnations of hitler and prays for a "better" germany to arise from the ashes of his ruined country. the birth of "freedom radio" sees the creation of an underground group of anti-nazis who regard karl as their leader.


== cast ==
clive brook as dr. karl roder
diana wynyard as irena roder
raymond huntley as rabenau
derek farr as hans glaser
joyce howard as elly
howard marion-crawford as kummer
john penrose as otto
morland graham as father landbach
ronald squire as rudolf spiedler
reginald beckwith as fenner
clifford evans as dressler
bernard miles as captain mller s
gibb mclaughlin as dr weiner
muriel george as hanna
martita hunt as frau lehmann - concierge
hay petrie as sebastian
manning whiley as ss trooper
katie johnson as granny schmidt
george hayes as policeman
everley gregg as maria tattenheim
marie ault as woman customer
abraham sofaer as heini
joan hickson as katie
pat mcgrath as kurt
wyndham milligan as ss guard
bunty payne as ema
william hartnell as radio operator


== critical reception ==
the new york times critic wrote that "this is a frankly propagandistic drama...the admirable emotional restraint which went into the making of several of the better british war films seen here in the past year is sadly lacking"sky movies called the film, "gripping, strongly cast and more subtle than most propaganda thrillers of its time...and film buffs may spot katie johnson, later to win fame in the ladykillers but here, 13 years earlier, already in granny roles!"


== external links ==
freedom radio at imdb


== references ==