friends is a 2001 indian tamil-language comedy-drama film, directed by siddique and produced by appachan. it is a remake of siddique's own 1999 malayalam film of the same name. the film stars vijay, suriya, and ramesh khanna, while devayani,  vijayalakshmi, abhinayashree, vadivelu, and radha ravi played the  supporting roles. the music was composed by ilaiyaraaja, while anandakuttan handled cinematography. it was released on 14 january 2001 and completed a 175-day theatrical run at the box office. this film also marks the second collaboration of vijay and suriya after nerrukku ner. the film was dubbed into telugu as devi puthurulu  and in hindi as friends.


== plot ==
aravindan (vijay), chandru (suriya), and krishnamoorthy (ramesh khanna) have been best friends since their childhood. they consider their friendship above everything else, including family. thus, chandru resists the romantic overtures of aravindan's younger sister amutha (vijaylakshmi). chandru, an orphan, stays with aravindan and is considered by aravindan's parents as a second son. some brushes with the law force aravindan and chandru to lie low in chennai for a couple of days, where they and krishnamoorthy take up jobs as painters in a mansion under contractor nesamani (vadivelu), who is krishnamoorthy's paternal uncle. aravindan falls in love with padmini (devayani), who lives in the mansion, though padmini only considers him as a friend; nevertheless she is grateful to him when he saves her from an accidental electrocution. but padmini's cousin abhirami has a crush on aravindan, and is enraged when she realises that he is in love with padmini. abhirami sends false letters to him in padmini's name and makes him believe that his love is reciprocated. so when padmini suddenly gets engaged to another man, chandru stands up for aravindans love and insults padmini in front of her entire family, causing her engagement to get cancelled. this makes padmini decide to marry aravindan, but with the intention to take revenge on chandru by breaking his and aravindan's friendship. but during their marriage, aravindan and padmini realise that abhirami is behind all the mishaps which had taken place, and that chandru is innocent. padmini reconciles with chandru and chandru's and amutha's wedding is fixed.
gowtham (sriman) is aravindan's cousin who lusts for amutha. he plans to separate aravindan and chandru so that he can marry amutha. he first sets amutha's sari on fire while she is cooking in the kitchen. chandru blames padmini for the mishap as she was in the kitchen with amutha at the time, even though padmini is innocent, but no one, including aravindan, believes chandrus accusation could be true. gowtham then turns his eye on the annual bullock race in which chandru is taking part, by loosening the wheels on chandru's cart with the intention to cause a serious accident and frame padmini as the culprit, thus creating a wedge between chandru and aravindan. unfortunately for gowtham, aravindan decides to take part in the race in chandru's place since chandru is to be married, and manages to win despite using the broken bullock cart. chandru accuses padmini of trying to kill him. padmini threatens to leave the house if aravindan remains friends with chandru and does not throw him out of the house. aravindan then reveals to her that he had accidentally killed chandru's deaf-and-dumb younger brother when they were children, which traumatised him so much that he never told anyone about it, and since then, he has been looking out for chandru out of the guilt that he had no one else in his life anymore. gowtham overhears their conversation and tells chandru about it to anger him. chandru fights with aravindan, breaks their friendship and leaves the house. aravindan tries to convince chandru to return and marry amutha, even if he cannot repair their friendship. however, in the process, aravindan falls from a cliff and seemingly dies.
five years later, chandru is a major in the indian army and has never returned to aravindan's home since his supposed death. he receives a letter from krishnamoorthy stating that aravindan is not dead, but in a vegetative state, not responding to anyone and only sitting in a corner. chandru immediately leaves for aravindan's house, where he also learns that aravindan and padmini have a young son whose name is chandru, in tribute to their friendship. meanwhile, gowtham, who has been torturing padmini and amutha since aravindan went into the vegetative state, finds out that chandru has returned, and beats him up. on hearing chandru's cries, aravindan wakes up from his coma state and subdues gowtham and his goons. in the end, aravindan, chandru and krishnamoorthy, as well as aravindan and padmini & chandru and amutha, are reunited happily.


== cast ==


== production ==
after their teaming in nerukku ner, vijay and suriya came together again in this film, a remake of a successful malayalam film of the same name that was produced by actress saritha, and had her husband mukesh co-starring with jayaram. siddique who directed the original has directed the tamil version too. ramesh khanna was selected to play the role which was enacted by sreenivasan in original. first meena was approached to play the female lead as she did the original malayalam version. due to dates problem, she could not be part of it. then jyothika was signed along with suvalakshmi to play the lead actresses in the film but soon backed out due to date problems and were replaced by devayani and new girl vijayalakshmi from mysore. shooting was held in a fast pace on location in ooty, pollachi, pazhani and udumalaipettai. the song 'thendral varum vazhiye' is shot in new zealand, etc.


== soundtrack ==
the film featured music composed by ilaiyaraaja received positive response and topped the charts. all lyrics of the songs were penned by palani bharathi.


== critical response ==
friends was released on 14 january 2001, thai pongal day. malathi rangarajan of the hindu stated, "with friendship as the theme, siddique presents a decent entertainer, which of course could have been crisper." a review from zee tv noted "at last, we have one thoroughly enjoyable picture this year" and "except for the end, which is a bit melodramatic, friends is an excellent movie for debutant director siddique."despite facing competition from ajith kumar's dheena, released on the same day, the film emerged a commercial success, running for more than 175 days in theatres.


== see also ==
pray for nesamani
snehamante idera


== references ==


== external links ==
friends at imdb