from hell it came is a 1957 american science fiction horror film directed by dan milner and written by richard bernstein, from a story by bernstein and jack milner. it was released by allied artists on a double bill with the disembodied.


== plot ==
a south seas island prince is wrongly convicted of murder and executed by having a knife driven into his heart, the result of a plot by a witch doctor (the true murderer) who resented the prince's friendly relations with american scientists stationed on a field laboratory on the island. the prince is buried in a hollow tree trunk and forgotten about until nuclear radiation reanimates him in the form of the "tabonga", a malevolent tree stump. the monster escapes from the laboratory and kills several people, including the prince's unfaithful wife, who is thrown into quicksand, and the witch doctor, whom the tabonga pushes down a hill to be impaled on his own crown of shark teeth. the creature cannot be stopped, burned, or trapped. only when a crack rifle shot from one of the scientists drives the knife (which still protrudes from the creature's chest) all the way through its heart does it finally die and sink into the swamp.


== cast ==
tod andrews as dr. william arnold
tina carver as dr. terry mason
linda watkins as mrs. mae kilgore
john mcnamara as prof. clark
gregg palmer as kimo
suzanne ridgeway as korey


== production ==
the iconic tabonga monster was designed by paul blaisdell (also known for his work on the she-creature, invasion of the saucer men, not of this earth and it! the terror from beyond space) but was manufactured by don post studios. this was the second and last feature film to be produced by the milner brothers.


== release ==
it was released by allied artists in 1957 on a double bill with the disembodied.through its warner archive collection, warner home video released the film on dvd on november 11, 2009, and on blu-ray on april 25, 2017.


== reception ==
according to film historian tim healey, it deserves an honored place in the canon of the world's worst movies. author and movie critic leonard maltin awarded the film 112 of 4 stars, writing, "as walking-tree movies go, this is at the top of the list". in his review for allmovie, originally written in 2013, bruce eder panned the film:the sheer badness of dan milner's from hell it came is mitigated ever so slightly by the efforts of paul blaisdell, who created the vengeful tree-creature called the tabonga. now, the creature itself it pretty ludicrous in its actual on-screen appearances, but given the fact that we're talking about a killer tree-stump...and a low-budget, the fact that blaisdell was able to devise anything at all that, even for a fraction of a second, might be scary, is the one part of the movie that does work. nothing else does...all of which leaves ridiculously campy fun as the sole reason to watch this very mildly entertaining misfire, which is funnier in the telling than the watching. on his website fantastic movie musings and ramblings, dave sindelar criticized the monster design and described the film as "slow, talky, confusing, and badly acted". tv guide awarded the film 2 out of 5 stars, calling it "silly" and "really goofy".


== references ==


== external links ==
from hell it came at imdb
from hell it came at allmovie
from hell it came at the tcm movie database