fukrey returns (transl.slackers return) is a 2017 indian hindi-language comedy film, directed by mrighdeep singh lamba, produced by farhan akhtar and ritesh sidhwani. the film is a sequel to fukrey. it was released on 8 december 2017.


== plot ==
after their admission into college in the previous film, hunny, choocha and lali enjoy their life in delhi. zafar keeps up with his business. bholi punjaban is released after 12 months in prison. she sends her troops to seize the fukras. the boys are brought up at her place along with pandit. she asks them about their plan to fool her. as the boys convince her, she gives them one chance and invests some money to open a lottery shop. people are given numbers to which they invest some money. choocha begins to distribute brochures around the city and more people invest.
meanwhile, minister babulal bhatia who belongs to janta vikas party, argues with the cm over the next election and bets him to win. police around the city conduct raids on drugs and fake lottery shops. after finding out the fukras' shop, babulal uses his power to change the lottery number and everyone who invested money are angered. the people gather around to beat them but they escape. they wake up at a construction area and spotted by pandit. it is here that choocha comes to know he can see the future. he sees a tiger in his dream which later attacks them. the group is later caught by bholi who is angered due to their foolishness, and orders to kill them. but choocha's ability impresses her and she forgives them.
the next morning, bholi narrates them to find a treasury which they agree if she releases them. babulal fears that people would get back money so he invites the boys at his residence. pandit is sent in disguise to keep a check. during a diner, the boys are forced to take an oath to help babulal with their welfare in return. the next day, the boys take the blame instead of babulal who misused people's money while bholi goes to the cm to hand some factory papers related to babulal and after the boys leave, police arrive and capture babulal. the boys return to their houses and but feel dejected by their loved ones. they decide to scheme up to earn more money.
the next morning, at pandit's place, choocha is forced to see a dream where lali holds a tiger cub. meanwhile, babulal comes to know about bholi's plan and ambushes her place. but he forgives her murder on the pretext to find a treasury. to do so, bholi calls hunny for it who requests a tiger cub which she sold. the boys and bholi's guards returns at the park where they are joined by priya and neetu. they dig a hole and enter a cave where they are spotted by the cub's mother. however, after escaping, they lead to a factory with huge amounts of illegal goods. they find out the products to be worth 400 million.
babulal arrives at the place only to find out that the warehouse actually constrains babulal's trade products. he is angered and orders to banish them but police arrive on the scene. in a flashback, while estimating worth, zafar called the police knowing babulal bought this from china. choocha wills to propose bholi to which she replies him with a kiss. the police drive away from the scene.
later, the fukras inaugurate an electronics shop with the products they found in the warehouse.


== cast ==
pulkit samrat as vikas gulati aka hunny
varun sharma as dilip singh aka choocha
ali fazal as zafar
richa chadda as bholi punjaban
manjot singh as lalli halwai
priya anand as priya sharma
vishakha singh as neetu singh raina
pankaj tripathi as pandit
nalneesh neel as mangu
sanjana sanghi as katty
rajiv gupta as minister babulal bhatia
pallavi batra as namita (receptionist at hotel)
purnendu bhattacharya as chief minister of delhi
nataa stankovi special appearance in song "mehbooba"


== production ==
on 30 january 2016, a sequel to fukrey was announced. it is revealed that, the sequel will feature the original cast and will be again directed by lamba and produced by excel entertainment. filming began in august 2016 in delhi .


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film is composed by shaarib-toshi, sumeet bellary, prem-hardeep, jasleen royal, gulraj singh, shree d and ishq bector while the lyrics have been penned by kumaar, satya khare, aditya sharma, shree d, mrighdeep singh lamba, vipul vig and raftaar. the first track of the film titled as "mehbooba" which is sung by neha kakkar, yasser desai, mohammed rafi and rapped by raftaar was released on 15 november 2017. the soundtrack was released by zee music company on 16 november 2017.


== critical reception ==
kriti tulsiani of news18 gave the film a rating of 2 out of 5 and said that, "watch fukrey returns if you like but dont expect the spark of the original. plus, the giggles are more like a reminder of the original fukrey and nothing more." rohit vats of hindustan times gave the film a rating of 1.5 out of 5 saying that, "blame it on the success of the original or the four-year-gap between the two films, fukrey returns isnt even a patch on fukrey. fukrey returns is a tedious 141-minute watch which is unfunny, unintelligent and repetitive." namrata joshi of the hindu said that, "the novelty and freshness of sleeper hit fukrey wear down drastically in the sequel." shubhra gupta of the indian express gave the film a rating of 1.5 out of 5 and said that, "this pulkit samrat and varun sharma starrer is relentlessly juvenile. the situations are so tired and contrived theres nothing that even such capable hands as richa chadha and pankaj tripathi can do, to retain our interest." saibal chatterjee of ndtv gave the film a rating of 2 out of 5 and said that, "fukrey returns comes nowhere near being the rip-roaring ride that the 2013 sleeper hit fukrey. for a film that aspires to be a full-on laugh riot, fukrey returns is a bit of a trudge."rachit gupta of filmfare gave the film a rating of 2 out of 5 and said that, "fukrey returns is a sequel that wants to be bigger, better and funnier than the original. in all fairness, it does manage to fulfil its ambitions on two accounts. it is bigger, it is funnier but it's certainly not better." uday bhatia of livemint wasn't impressed with the movie and said that, "fukrey was rooted in the everyday: the comedy seemed to arise naturally from the slackers surroundings. the sequel, though, has the desperation and unfocussed energy of a work that's not sure why it exists." sukanya verma of rediff gave the film a rating of 2 out of 5 and said that fukrey returns is "a clumsily conceived sequel, a foolhardy endeavour to milk a fluke, an outright bore". suhani singh of india today felt that the "film has little apart from varun sharma" and gave it a rating of 1.5 out of 5.


== references ==


== external links ==
fukrey returns at imdb
fukrey returns at bollywood hungama