fun size (known as half pint in some countries) is a 2012 american teen comedy film directed by josh schwartz and written by max werner.
starring victoria justice, thomas mann, jane levy and chelsea handler, the film tells the story of a teenage girl's halloween plans gone awry when she's made to babysit her young brother, who disappears into a sea of trick-or-treaters and with her best friends and two nerds at her side, she needs to find her brother before her mom realizes he's missing.
fun size was released in theaters on october 26, 2012 by paramount pictures and grossed $11 million against its $14 million budget.


== plot ==
in cleveland, ohio, high school senior wren desantis' opening narration describes halloween in cleveland as a time for its citizens to dress up and be less ashamed of themselves, citing the nickname "the mistake by the lake." wren's widowed mother, joy, is dating a 26-year-old named keevin. wren has her heart set on college life at new york university. her friend april has her eyes set on social status, and wren's nerdy friend roosevelt has his heart set on wren. the two girls are surprised when they find they are invited to a halloween party by local heartthrob aaron riley. unfortunately, on the day wren is supposed to go to the party, she is commanded by her mother to take her 8-year-old brother albert trick-or-treating so she can go to a party with keevin. the party that keevin invites joy to turns out to be run by keevin's friend nate brueder. at a haunted house later that night, wren and april run into roosevelt and his best friend peng. albert meets a convenience store employee named fuzzy who seeks revenge against jrgen, a mixed-martial arts fighter, who won the heart of his ex-girlfriend lara. roosevelt's parents are revealed to be semi-eccentric pacifistic lesbians.
wren suspects that albert might be at a local captain chicken restaurant on euclid avenue, a pirate-themed fast food chain. again they arrive too late to find him, almost running him over while fleeing puglio before he is rescued by denise, a college girl dressed as a "galaxy scout" (a fictional anime character). remembering fuzzy's description of jrgen, albert stows away in his convertible. wren, roosevelt, and peng drive off looking for albert, and now april, who later calls from aaron riley's party with the false impression that she has found albert. wren, roosevelt, and peng arrive at the party, and the earlier duel gives peng some level of social acceptance.
wren receives a phone call from jrgen, who is holding albert hostage at his house, and threatens to turn him over to the police for pulling the stunt with fuzzy, unless she gives him a ransom of $400 in cash, which she doesn't have. after jrgen gives her his address, wren desperately runs through the streets of cleveland trying to find his house. arriving there and telling jrgen she doesn't have the money, he calls the police but puts them on hold when wren finds out that he is a fan of the beastie boys, and offers to give him the collectible jacket she inherited from her late father which was left behind by mike d as a substitute for cash. jrgen seems interested in her offer, but he calls the police until fuzzy breaks in to rescue the boy and his older sister by throwing bricks and fireworks throughout the house. jrgen is injured in the explosion.
wren and albert visit the cemetery where their father is buried and place a plastic pumpkin with flowers on his grave. albert thanks wren for finding and rescuing him, just before their mother picks them up and drives them home. roosevelt also states that he will get a part-time job at captain chicken to raise money for the chicken statue's repairs. joy then allows roosevelt and wren to kiss. meanwhile, april wakes up to find herself in the arms of peng, and after looking around for witnesses decides to make out with him again. fuzzy meets denise, who asks him out on a date. fuzzy also reveals that his real name is manuel. later, albert reveals that he secretly has been pulling prank phone calls on both his mother, sister, and his sister's friend for six months, which includes the uploading of a video to wren's facebook page, making fun of wren's bug dance and "explaining rap".


== cast ==
victoria justice as wren desantis, albert's sister
thomas mann as roosevelt leroux, one of the nerds who helps wren. he has a crush on wren.
thomas middleditch as manuel "fuzzy," a clerk whom albert befriends, and lara's former boyfriend
jane levy as april martin, wren's best friend; a persistent social climber, she would rather drag wren to a cool kids' party over finding her brother.
jackson nicoll as albert "spidey" desantis, wren's oddball 8-year-old brother who goes around in his underwear.
osric chau as peng chong, roosevelt's best friend and fellow nerd who helps wren; he has a crush on april.
chelsea handler as joy desantis, wren and albert's widowed mother.
thomas mcdonell as aaron riley, the most popular guy in school.
riki lindhome as denise, a young college girl in a galaxy scout costume.
johnny knoxville (uncredited) as jrgen, a mixed-martial arts fighter who is a bully to fuzzy and albert.
josh pence as keevin  (pronounced keeven, like "steven"), joy's 26-year-old boyfriend.
ana gasteyer as jackie leroux, roosevelt's mom
kerri kenney-silver as barb leroux, roosevelt's other mom
patrick de ledebur as mike puglio, a school bully nicknamed the "wedgie king."
james pumphrey as nate brueder, a friend of keevin's who hosts a raging party in his parents' basement.
holmes osborne as mr. brueder
annie fitzpatrick as mrs. brueder
peter navy tuiasosopo as mr. mahani (samoan man)
willam belli as qwerty
abby elliott as lara, jrgen's girlfriend
cooper ross as zombie doctor


== production ==
in january 2011, it was announced that josh schwartz would direct the film as his feature film directorial debut. by the spring of 2011, the lead role had been offered to victoria justice, and jane levy had entered talks for her role in the film, with paramount announcing initial plans for the project to be shot in minnesota. the location was changed to michigan and later to cleveland, ohio. when the production moved to cleveland, a home was scouted and selected in cleveland, ohio. in june 2011, chelsea handler entered negotiations to co-star in the film. the film was released on october 26, 2012. director josh schwartz discounted internet claims that he was playing a convenience-store clerk. "no," he said shortly before the movie opened. "i get asked about it a lot, but that's an imdb mistake. there are convenience-store clerks in the movie  just none played by me!"


== release ==
a music video of carly rae jepsen's "this kiss" was shown prior to the film's release in theaters and fun size's star thomas mcdonell make a cameo on music video .  fun size opened at #10, earning $4.1 million over its first weekend at 3,014 theaters and averaging about $1,361 per venue. the film earned $11.4 million and is the lowest grossing wide released film from nickelodeon movies.  fun size was released on dvd and blu-ray on february 19, 2013.


== reception ==
fun size received negative reviews from critics, several of whom criticized the adult humor and sexual content despite the film's nickelodeon pedigree.  rotten tomatoes reports that of 25% of 73 surveyed critics gave the film a positive review; the average rating is 4/10. the consensus states: "it occasionally shows surprising flashes of wit, but fun size is too safe and formulaic  not to mention unfunny  to survive comparisons to the '80s teen movies it eagerly imitates." adam graham of detroit news gave this film a score of c and said that "it feels like a project that was pitched for the cw but watered down for nickelodeon audiences. in the end, everyone loses." jen chaney of washington post gave this film a score of 1/4, calling it "a 90-minute theatrical release from nickelodeon productions that, if anything, should have aired as a half-hour nickelodeon special." david martindale of dallas morning news gave the film a c+, saying, "like a 'fun size' chocolate bar, it's just empty calories. it's a momentary pleasure, instantly forgotten." on the positive side, sheri linden of the hollywood reporter enjoyed this film and wrote, "though it doesn't always hit the hilarity target, this tween-targeted romp strikes a sweet-but-not-sappy balance."


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
fun size at imdb
fun size at rotten tomatoes
fun size at box office mojo