funny cow is a 2017 british comedy drama film directed by adrian shergold, written by tony pitts and starring maxine peake, paddy considine, tony pitts, stephen graham and alun armstrong. the original songs and score were composed by richard hawley, with additional songs by ollie trevers. the film follows a woman making a name for herself in the stand-up comedy scene of working men's clubs in northern england.the film had its world premiere on 9 october 2017 in the united kingdom at the london film festival. and was released theatrically in the uk by eone on 20 april 2018.


== plot ==
funny cow charts the rise to stardom of a female comedian through the 1970s and 1980s. it is set against the backdrop of working men's clubs and the stand-up comedy circuit of the north of england


== cast ==
maxine peake as funny cow
stephen graham as mike / funny calf's dad
paddy considine as angus
tony pitts as bob
alun armstrong as lenny
lindsey coulson as funny cow mum
kevin eldon as danny
christine bottomley as funny calf mum
hannah walters as jean
john bishop as colin pine
vic reeves as ventriloquist (credited as jim moir)
corinne bailey rae as coffee
richard hawley as cream / rodney chittingdon
kevin rowland as jeff
diane morgan as margaret
hebe beardsall as young funny cow
macy shackleton as funny calf
dominic brunt as landlord
robert curtis as dial house concert secretary
bobby knutt as crookes club concert secretary
graham hughes as jacques lecock
duggie brown as old man
tom gibbons as young bob
jayne bickerton as mad woman
alfie graham as liam
grace graham as debs


== production ==
'funny cow' was shot entirely on location in january and february 2017 in leeds, bradford, saltaire and harrogate. the principal production company was pow films. post production was at lipsync post in london and the financing production partner was gizmo films productions. 


== reception ==
'funny cow' received high praise on release with four star reviews from the guardian, empire, the evening standard, the financial times, the independent, filmseekers, screen mayhem and with the times and the daily star awarding a full five stars. 
bfi magazine 'sight and sound' listed 'funny cow' as their film of the week. mark kermode also made 'funny cow' his film of the week  for the april 2018 theatrical release and reviewed it again for the august 2018 dvd release noting the division in critics perception of the film and central character, kermode emphasised 'its heart is absolutely in the right place but i think that is because it is not ashamed to depict the world it is actually representing'.
the film garnered two bifa nominations in 2018; best actress for maxine peake and best music for richard hawley.
on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film holds a certified fresh rating of 78%


== references ==