gajakesari is a 2014 indian kannada epic historical action film directed by cinematographer krishna and produced by jayanna and bogendra. the film stars yash in leading role along with amulya and anant nag. the film also prominently features an elephant named arjuna from waynad, kerala. actor prakash raj plays as narrator for the film to introduce yash's character. also uncredited writer sai prasad did the still photography and concept design for the making of the movie. this film is also dubbed in hindi as gajakeasari:the big lion.


== plot ==
the film begins in the forest area of aanegudde, an elephant reserve. a state minister arrives at the place of a local don, rana. rana forces the minister to sign a deal to open a resort at anegudde. the minister signs reluctantly after seeing his bodyguard being murdered by rana.
the scene next shifts to prakash raj introducing an ancient temple in the royal city of mysore called "shankara narayana" temple, which is being managed by a holy muth (holy association), headed by the pontiff (anantnag). the muth has an outstanding reputation for not being involved into any politics and also being equally revered by both shaivites and vaishnavites. then comes into the picture, the hero krishna (yash), with his mother girija lokesh. krishna is a happy-go-lucky youth, a hard-core rajkumar fan, who has a kind heart for people and is involved in a small-time loan financing company. it is revealed that krishnas family is very much devoted to the muth and also that he was born after krishnas father pledged that krishna would be sent to become the next pontiff of the muth after anantnag. in this context, krishna is given a warm welcome at the muth and is requested by the muth's head anantnag to take up the spiritual leadership. krishna refuses as he feels he is still attached to the worldly ambitions, and he requests the pontiff to suggest an alternative. the pontiff says that krishna has to donate an elephant to the muth, if he cannot take up the leadership of the muth.
krishna first tries several ways to avoid taking up sanyasa ashramam in various negative ways, but each time in his attempt, he is given full respect and protected.
krishna finally goes in search of the elephant and hence sets his foot in the forest of aaneguddi. he takes the help of the local forest officer "agni" (rangayana raghu) who introduces him to the forest tribal people. the ancestors of these tribal people have been in that forest since centuries and have taken care of the local elephants. they befriend krishna, and some incidents make krishna meet a single strong elephant, "kalinga", who is feared by the tribal folk for his roughness. krishna also meets a young ecologist (amulya).
the local don rana hatches a plan to route out the local tribal folk from their homes and build a resort there. when he comes there with his henchmen, krishna and amoolya revolt and help the folk. krishna fights the henchmen and creates fear in the mind of rana. rana takes his right-hand man selva to kill krishna, and at this juncture, the elephant kalinga comes to his rescue. 
the head of the tribal folk sees krishna reducing the anger of kalinga and deduces that he is definitely the incarnation of baahubali (yash), a fierce warrior in the army of the king of karunadu. the tribal chief then narrates the story about the valour of baahubali. the king of karunadu is about to be attacked by a king verma. at this juncture, baahubali defeats one of the strongest warriors of verma. saddened at this, verma resorts to a cunning way and makes baahubalis close friend poison baahubali. when he is poisoned, verma attacks him with his army along with the traitor minister of karunadu. in spite of his dying state, baahubali single-handedly defeats the entire army of verma and kills them. in this fight, baahubali loses his pet elephant, "balarama" (this is the elephant which has incarnated as kalinga), who kills some of the enemy soldiers and dies. finally, baahubali dies, and the king of karunadu awards the title of "gajakesari" to baahubali for his meritorious act of bravery and his service to the motherland.
now, krishna, having known his past life, faces rana and his henchmen and is almost killed. the pontiff anantnag, having sensed krishnas battle for life, performs mrityunjaya homa at the muth. this ritual strengthens krishna, and kalinga aids him to finish off rana and the henchmen. finally, the muth pontiff arrives at the tribal village and tells krishna that it was his destiny that he had to help the village tribal people and that he has to continue to protect them as he did in his previous birth. the pontiff also tells him that he need not become the next successor to him nor donate any elephant to the muth. he blesses krishna to marry meera(amulya) and lead a prosperous life.


== cast ==


== release ==
the film released at around 150 theaters across karnataka. it was reported that the film recovered its making cost even before the release. the satellite rights were sold at 4.5 crore (us$630,000). thus, the film broke records even before the release.


=== overseas release ===
following its success at the domestic box-office, gajakesari was screened in the united states, germany, ireland, singapore, canada, japan, hong kong and london.


== soundtrack ==
the music for the film and soundtracks were composed by v. harikrishna, with lyrics for the soundtrack penned by yogaraj bhat, a. p. arjun, k. kalyan and pawan wadeyar. the album has six soundtracks.the audio launch event of gajakesari was a low-key affair without much fanfare or stage performances. the function was held on 11 april 2014.


== awards ==


== references ==


== external links ==
gajakesari at imdb