galpo holeo satti (bengali:   ) is a 1966 comedic bengali film directed by tapan sinha. it stars bhanu banerjee, jogesh chatterjee, bharati devi, chaya devi, ajoy ganguli, rabi ghosh, rudraprasad sengupta. later the film was twice remade in hindi as bawarchi, starring rajesh khanna, hero no.1, starting govinda in the title role which was remade in tamil as samayalkaaran and in kannada twice as sakala kala vallabha and no 73, shanthi nivasa.


== plot ==
a new servant arrives in a family which is suffering from internal tension. the new servant, whose identity is itself under suspicion, gradually becomes lovable to all of the family members including the old ailing family head. the story unravels how this new man in their life helps each of the family members to find out new meaning in their individual lives as well as find out the happiness of a close-knit family.
as the name is translated in english as "truth seems like a fiction" the film introduces a character in the first half who is indescribably happy, fond of doing work and very much skillful at everything under the sun. he comes as a servant to the family of nearly 10 members when they are in critical need of someone like him. they have lost the peace in their life, getting angry over others over silliest reasons. then this man appears like an angel. with his mastery at doing household work, intellectual ideas, and even cultural abilities he makes everyone happy and all the good things start happening magically.
in the end, when the whole family is happy and reunited, he leaves all of a sudden without notifying anyone. he remains a mystery till the end.


== cast ==
dhanonjoy: rabi ghosh
baba: jogesh chattapadhyay
barokhoka: prasad mukhopadhyay
barobou: chaya devi
sejokhoka: bankim ghosh
sejobou: bharati devi
chotokhoka: bhanu bandopadhyay
khoka: ajoy ganguli
boss: rudraprasad sengupta
thief: chinmoy ray
krishna: krishna basu
alok: partho mukherjee 


== soundtrack ==

all lyrics are written by tapan sinha; all music is composed by tapan sinha.


== references ==


== external links ==
galpo holeo satti at imdb
 galpo holeo satti  at complete index to world film
ftvdb.bfi.org.uk