gang is a 2000 indian hindi-language gangster drama film directed by mazhar khan. the film stars nana patekar, kumar gaurav, javed jaffrey, jackie shroff, juhi chawla and imtiaz khan in pivotal roles. the film began production in 1990 and was delayed for 10 years because of director mazhar khan's ill health. after his death in 1998, his assistant director helped complete the film for release on 14 april 2000. the film was also the last to feature music by rd burman who died in 1994.


== plot ==
four friends, gangu (jackie shroff), abdul (nana patekar), nihal (kumar gaurav) and gary (jaaved jaffrey)- which forms the word g.a.n.g, get together to start their crime business, but their roots are built on friendship and trust. they succeed in their criminal goals, but later they are attacked by a local gangster tagdu (gulshan grover). as a result, g.a.n.g. retaliates with tagdu and joins with lala (mukesh khanna), a criminal leader with a conscience. but this does not pleases abdul as they work for free with lala and decides to join forces with girja singh (imtiaz khan), another gang leader, for money, to which gangu disagrees. gary's sister is later killed by tagdu's men as a form of early humiliation, which shatters them deeply. later g.a.n.g. and tagdu's men are embroiled in a gang war, in which gangu is arrested and sentenced to jail for five years.
when gangu is released, he witnesses that abdul is now driving a taxi, his mother is well looked after, and that nihal and gary have also started doing business. it is when gangu meets his sweetheart, sanam (juhi chawla), and proposes marriage, and subsequently learns that his friends are working with girja singh. nihal and divya (ektaa sohini) marriage begins to fall apart as their child is born handicapped due to the former's drug addiction and later divya commits suicide with her child. this incident shatters nihal, and he goes on a murder spree, for which he is arrested. girja orders abdul to kill nihal before he gives the statement against him to the court, but abdul, indebted towards their friendship, kills girja men instead of nihal. finally, abdul and gary decides to surrender to the police for the sake of gangu and seeks the help of the chief minister (raza murad). but this displeases the latter as if they are arrested, and they will even testify against him, so he plans to murder the g.a.n.g. with the help of girja and tagdu.
tagdu kills gangu's mother in order to weaken the team, but g.a.n.g. finishes the minister's men, including tagdu and girja. in the process, gangu is severely injured and is on his deathbed and asks them for a promise to leave the crime world forever, to which all agree, and gangu dies after. the g.a.n.g. is about to surrender to the police, till the point where the minister orders the police for "shoot to kill" and kills the team.
after a week of encounter, lala kill the chief minister for betrayal from g.a.n.g (that is the actually first scene of the film)


== cast ==
jackie shroff as gangu
nana patekar as abdul
kumar gaurav as nihal
javed jaffrey as gary
juhi chawla as sanam
ekta sohini as divya
imtiaz khan as girja singh
gulshan grover as tagdu
shagufta ali as tinnie (gary's sister)
mukesh khanna as lala
dalip tahil as commissioner shamsher singh


== development ==
director mazhar khan had started the project in 1990 and faced delays due to his ill-health. however, khan revived the project in 1998. khan later died on 16 september 1998 due to kidney failure, thus keeping the production work on hold. however, in 1999, mashkoor chowdhry, the assistant of khan worked on the film's remaining direction, technical aspects and leftover production.


== soundtrack ==
the music of this movie was mainly composed by anu malik. r. d. burman composed only one track, chhod ke na jaana, sung by asha bhosle, for the film. but since the movie faced late release and his death, mazhar khan signed in anu malik for the composition. it can be noted that anu malik used some bits of the background score composed by burman, of the movie, caravan for the song dil hai bechain in the late composer's remembrance. all of the songs are written by javed akhtar.


== references ==


== bibliography ==


== external links ==
gang at imdb
cult of kumar