gang leader  is a 1991 indian telugu-language action crime film written and directed by vijaya bapineedu, and produced by maganti ravindranath chowdary. the film stars chiranjeevi and vijayashanti, while rao gopal rao, anandaraj, murali mohan, and sarath kumar play supporting roles. the soundtrack was composed by bappi lahiri with dance choreography by prabhu deva. the film explores the concepts of exploitation of law enforcement by anti-social behaviour and the impact of mob psychology.the film opened to highly positive reviews from the critics and was commercially successful at the box office. it was screened at the international film festival of india. later, it was dubbed in tamil with the same title. the film was later remade in hindi as aaj ka goonda raaj (1992) where chiranjeevi reprises his role, and in kannada as kutumba (2003).


== plot ==
raghupathi (murali mohan), raghava (sarath kumar) and rajaram (chiranjeevi) are brothers. raghupathi is the only breadwinner of the family, raghava is preparing for the civil services examination, and rajaram is an unemployed, and freelance dancer who spends time with his four friends in search of jobs. they roam in the city until midnight. rajaram comes home at midnight and sleeps until noon; his grandmother sabari (nirmalamma) yells at him for his irresponsibility and callousness. one day, rajaram makes kanyakumari (vijayashanti) vacate the house on a payment basis as she is not paying the rent to the landlord. consequently, she barges into rajaram's house for accommodation.
at one situation, rajaram goes to custody for money so that he can support his brother raghava who is in need of funding for his ias preparation. meanwhile, ekambaram (raogopal rao) a mafia ringleader known for contract killing, and extortion, alongside his brother kanakambaram (anandaraj) kill rajaram's elder brother raghupathi as he witnesses a homicide. rajaram was spending time in jail when this incident happens, however his friends are aware of raghupathi's death. rajaram, on the other hand, thinks that his brother's death was an accident.
raghava becomes an ias officer and marries latha (sumalatha), which was a scheme planned by ekambaram and kanakambaram so that they can escape criminal cases with his support. latha hates raghava's family members, whereas kanyakumari loves rajaram and his family members. meanwhile, rajaram comes to know about his brother's death and inquires as to who was responsible for the death. his friends are also murdered by ekambaram and kanakambaram at the time. rajaram is framed by the murders, and raghava disowns him. with kanyakumari's help, rajaram escapes from jail, and kanyakumari reveals that she is ekambaram's daughter. she ran away from home after her father killed her mother, and then she began moving into other people's houses. after hearing this, rajaram falls for her. the film ends with rajaram avenging his brother's death by killing the villains and in the process uniting his broken family.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music and background score was provided by bappi lahiri and the lyrics were penned by veturi sundararama murthy and bhuvanachandra. the soundtrack was an instant hit and "papa rita" and "vaana vaana velluvaye" were a rage in the entire state at that time.
bhuvanachandra noted that "vaana vaana" was his first song on rain, he was initially apprehensive about writing this song since other songs of the same nature were popular. bappi composed the tune at suresh guest house, initially, the tune was rejected however bhuvan insisted that the tune should be retained. later, the song "vaana vaana velluvaye" was re-mixed by mani sharma for the 2012 film rachcha.


== reception ==
the movie was a huge success. it is considered to be one of the top movies in chiranjeevi's career. this movie earned more than 70 million of distributory share. gang leader did a 162-day run at sudharshan theatre in hyderabad. the movie successfully completed 100 days in more than 50 theaters. the movie was dubbed into tamil and kannada. it was a success in those areas also.


== trivia ==
the classic car which was used in the movie "citron cx pallas" at the time owned by relangi thirumalla babu, was the only car in south india at that time. the car can be seen in the movie as chiranjeevi and vijayashanti are talking and the scene cut to marriage and vijayashanti commands chiranjeevi to follow her to marriage.the film's 100 days function's video footage was used in the telugu comedy film appula appa rao.


== references ==


== external links ==
gang leader at imdb