gattu battu is an indian animated television series produced by toonz animation which aired the first season on nickelodeon india and nickelodeon sonic. the show premiered on 1 may 2017.the show showcases the story of two friends gattu and battu who run a detective and security agency.two friends gattu battu run a security and detective agency. in season two episode one they meet two girls named kavi and sha they run a japanese spa and after the first episode they become siblings. ting tong their goofy sidekick has a weakness of memory loss. doctor bhatawadekar makes gadgets for them to beat sher singh. sher singh is the agonist, he was taken to jail by inspector manmaani and then miya sigh saved sher singh. then they became siblings too then they are the don and dona of vishrampur. they make plans of defeating gattu and his gang like hiring different people, ordering different inventions and kidnapping their younger sister sha.
one day gattu and his gang got applications for being actors and actresses for horror films, children films, action movies, ninja movies, emotional movies and sitcoms. then they become famous stars. though they are rich they wear simple fashionable costumes. gattu wears orange men's fashion, kavi wears yellow ladies' fashion, battu wears bluish purple men's fashion, sha wears hot pink ladies' fashion.
doctor bhatawadekar makes orange, yellow, bluish purple, hot pink, black and white satellite bracelets. he has made extenders for kavi's and sha's heel boots and he has put a costume transformer for kavi's and sha's necklaces.
when gattu and his gang go to catch sher singh, miya singh and the robber gang. they split up into four directions. then sher singh, miya singh and their gang follow the direction in which sha goes then sher singh, miya singh and the gang trap sha in a circle and sha fights with the gang and when she does the summer soul bima catches her and takes the fainting potion dart and prick her before she calls battu. they celebrate christmas, halloween, diwali and holi.


== characters ==
battu: the brain of the gang and the detective who is 21 years old. he likes caffuccino and he drinks caffuccino from a bluish purple cup with a black 'b' letter written. he has a bluish purple satellite bracelet, a bluish purple iphone case written as battu in black with a taki taki (ozuna's part) ringtone and a bluish purple tab case written as battu in black. he has a pair of bluish purple glasses. he always looks after his younger sister sha because she gets in danger but sometimes he fails. he has a bluish purple wallet with a photo of him, sha, kavi and gattu. he can play taki taki from the piano, he can play taki taki from the western and eastern flute, and he can play taki taki from the violin. he wakes up at 5:00am.
sha: the multi talented, bold and the emotional princess who is 20 years old. she likes ice tae and she drinks ice tea from a hot pink cup with a black 's' letter written.  she is a yoga teacher, dancer, singer, actress, artist and an acrobatic expert. she is shorter than her elder brothers gattu and battu and her elder sister kavi. she has a slim body, a snow white skin and long hair up to her feet. she has a hot pink satellite bracelet, a hot pink iphone case written as sha in black with a taki taki (selena gomez's part) ringtone and a hot pink tab case written as sha in black. she has a pair of hot pink glasses. she always gets into danger because sher singh, miya singh and their gang kidnap her and she gets sick because of the fainting potion. she has a hot pink wallet with a photo of hers, kavi, battu and gattu. she can play taki taki from the piano, she can play taki taki from the western and eastern flute, and she can play taki taki from the violin. she wakes up at 4:30am.
kavi:  the multi talented and bold princess who is 22 years old. she likes apples. she is a dancer, singer, actress, artist and an acrobatic expert. she is shorter than her elder brother gattu and younger brother battu and taller than her younger sister sha. she has a slim body, a snow white skin and long hair up to her feet. she has a yellow satellite bracelet, a yellow iphone case written as kavi in black with a con calma (katy perry's part) ringtone and a yellow tab case written as kavi in black. but sometimes she fails she always looks after her younger sister sha because she gets in danger she has a yellow wallet with a photo of hers, sha, battu and gattu. she can play con calma from the piano, she can play con calma from the western and eastern flute, and she can play con calma from the violin. she wakes up at 4:30am.
gattu: the fighter of the gang who is 23 years old. he likes carrots and he eats a carrot before bashing up with sher singh's gang, he has an orange satellite bracelet, an orange iphone case written as gattu in black with a con calma(daddy yankee's part) ringtone and an orange tab case written as gattu in black. he always looks after his younger sister sha because she gets in danger but sometimes he fails. he has an orange wallet with a photo of him, kavi, sha and battu. he can play con calma from the piano, he can play con calma from the western and eastern flute, and he can play con calma from the violin. he wakes up at 5:00am.


== films ==


== reception ==
gattu battu music video garnered 2.7 million views in three weeks on youtube.


== references ==