geography club is a 2013 american comedy-drama film directed by gary entin from a screenplay by edmund entin, based on the 2003 novel of the same name by brent hartinger. the film stars cameron deane stewart, justin deeley, meaghan martin, allie gonino, nikki blonsky, andrew caldwell, marin hinkle, ana gasteyer, and scott bakula.
it premiered on abc family as a world premiere movie.


== plot ==
16-year-old russell is still going on dates with girls while having a secret relationship with football quarterback kevin, who will do anything to prevent his football teammates from finding out. min and therese tell everyone that they are just really good friends. and then there is ike, who cannot figure out who he is or who he wants to be. finding the truth too hard to hide, they all decide to form the geography club, thinking nobody else in their right mind would ever want to join. however, their secrets may soon be discovered and they could have to face the choice of revealing who they really are.


== cast ==
cameron deane stewart as russell middlebrook
justin deeley as kevin land
andrew caldwell as gunnar
meaghan martin as trish
allie gonino as kimberly
ally maki as min
nikki blonsky as therese
alex newell as ike
teo olivares as brian bund
dexter darden as jared sharp
grant harvey as nolan lockwood
marin hinkle as barbara land
ana gasteyer as mrs. toles
scott bakula as carl land
wesley eure as mr. kaplan
mike muscat as a deranged homeless man


== release ==
geography club premiered at the newport beach film festival on april 27, 2013. the film received a limited theatrical release by breaking glass pictures on november 15, 2013 and was also released digitally the same day on itunes, amazon video and vod.


== reception ==
film review aggregator rotten tomatoes reports that 64% of critics gave the film a positive review based on 11 reviews, with an average score of 5.25/10. on metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 based on reviews from critics, the film has a score of 57 based on 5 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews".writing for the huffington post, john lopez describes the film as entertaining and praises the themes as "universal and relatable", as well as for trying to define a "new normal" where homosexuality is accepted as an everyday thing.entertainment tonight hails geography club saying, "every year sees the release of one film so culturally important it should be required viewing. this year, that film is geography club." the movie and television review and classification board (mtrcb) of the philippine government gave the movie a pg rating and highly commends the film as a "sweet and sensitive coming out, coming of age movie based on the first novel of the young adult series/play of the same name."


== awards ==
following is a list of awards that geography club or its cast have won or for which they have been nominated.