get yourself a college girl, also released as the swingin' set, is a 1964 metrocolor film comedy in the style of a beach party movie. the plot involves a college co-ed who tries to balance her time writing songs and dealing with her publisher who tries to pursue her. it was directed by sidney miller and written by robert e. kent, and filmed at sun valley, idaho, united states.


== plot ==
terry taylor (mary ann mobley) is a senior at conservative wyndham college for women (fictitious), and under an assumed name, a successful pop songwriter. after her publisher gary underwood (chad everett) unknowingly exposes her career, wyndham's board of trusteesincluding the college founder's grandson, california state senator hubert morrison (willard waterman)condemns terry for indecent behavior.
to distract herself from a possible expulsion, terry, her friends sue ann mobley (chris noel) and lynne (nancy sinatra), and their physical-education instructor marge endicott (joan o'brien) travel to sun valley, idaho, for a christmas-break ski vacation. there, they meet gary and his artist friend armand (fabrizio mioni); senator morrison, who wants to solicit the youth vote; and lynne's husband.
the dave clark five, the animals, and other musical acts perform in the background as gary and armand romance terry and sue ann, respectively, while lynne and her husband spend the entire vacation in their room. senator morrison courts marge and shows that he is a talented dancer, but an embarrassing newspaper photograph threatens his re-election. the others demonstrate his support among the young by holding a successful telephone poll with musical performances.


== cast ==
mary ann mobley as teresa 'terry' taylor
joan o'brien as marge endicott
nancy sinatra as lynne
chris noel as sue ann mobley
chad everett as gary underwood
willard waterman as senator hubert morrison
fabrizio mioni as armand
james millhollin as gordon
paul todd as ray
donnie brooks as donnie
hortense petra as donna, the photographer
dorothy neumann as miss martha stone, dean of wyndham college
marti barris as secretary
mario costello as bellboy
the standells as the standells
the dave clark five as themselves
percy helton as senator's chauffeur
stan getz as himself
astrud gilberto as herself
roberta linn as herself
the bellboys as themselves
the animals as themselves
the rhythm masters as themselves


== production ==
the film was known as watusi a go-go, the swingin' set and the go go set.


== music ==
sidney miller and fred karger wrote two songs for the film, the swingin set, performed offscreen by donnie brooks at the films opening, and get yourself a college girl, performed in the film by mary ann mobley.
stan getz with the stan getz quartet back astrud gilberto as she performs the girl from ipanema.
the rhythm masters perform beat street rag.
jimmy smith with the jimmy smith trio perform comin' home johnny and the instrumental "the sermon."
freddie bell & roberta linn with the bellboys perform talkin' about love.
the standells perform bony maronie and the swim.
the dave clark five perform whenever you're around, and thinking of you baby."
the animals sing blue feeling and around and around.
singer nancy sinatra, who would have a hit record two years later, appears in this film but does not sing.


== reception ==
the los angeles times called it "inoffensively silly".


== see also ==
list of american films of 1964


== references ==


== external links ==
get yourself a college girl at imdb
get yourself a college girl at the tcm movie database
get yourself a college girl at allmovie