gharshana (transl.'friction' or 'clash') is a 2004 indian telugu-language action thriller film produced by g.sivaraju & c.venkatraju on geeta chitra international banner, directed by gautham menon. it is the telugu remake of the 2003 tamil film kaakha kaakha stars suriya and jyothika .venkatesh and asin played the lead roles and music was composed by harris jayaraj.


== plot ==
ramachandra ips is the deputy commissioner of police of hyderabad city. his upbringing as an orphan and the special nature of his job as a policeman have left him reluctant to form relationships with women. he doesn't have much faith in the judicial system and seeks to 'eliminate' the criminals in the town through encounters.
rama chandra, however, has fallen in love with maya. she is a school teacher and has fallen in love with him. initially, he shuns her love, fearing that his enemies might cause harm to her. but her love is so deep for him that she is willing to take this risk, and they are married.
in one of his encounters, rama chandra kills das, an orissa-based leader of a criminal family, and his troubles begin. das brother panda resolves to take revenge on rama chandra for the death of his brother by targeting chandra's friends and family members. maya is kidnapped by these villains and her husband sets out to rescue her and to free hyderabad city of this criminal menace at the same time. despite facing growing horror and betrayal at every step, ramachandra violently finishes off  panda and his mafia, and also rescuing his wounded wife. the ending scene features rama chandra a few months later, calling out to his wife 'maya' and both leaving in a car.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music composed by harris jayaraj. the music was released by aditya music company. (the soundtrack of kaakha kaakha was retained in the telugu remake except "andagaada" and "ye chilipi".)

all lyrics are written by kulasekhar.


== production ==
gautham menon subsequently remade the film in the telugu language for producer venkata raju.


== reception ==
idlebrain wrote: "the second half starts in an interesting style and it loses the steam as the climax approaches. the plus points of this film are music, venkatesh, photography and stylish taking. the negative points are slow narration, lack of telugu commercial elements, dry scenes and lack of substance. this film has got more style and less substance". indiaglitz wrote: "the film redeems itself due to the technical excellence and masterful craft of gowtham. in that, he has married the best of ram gopal varma and manirathnam (urban finesse, short, crisp and natural dialogues and getting the best out of his music director)". fullhyderabad wrote: "the action fans will love this movie. the encounters are sadistically gory! and that forms half of the movie". sify wrote: "speed, style and sparkle are the essence of gharshana".


== references ==


== external links ==
gharshana at imdb