ghayal (transl. wounded) is a 1990 indian hindi-language action film directed by rajkumar santoshi (in his directorial debut) and produced by dharmendra. the film stars dharmendra's son sunny deol, meenakshi seshadri, raj babbar and amrish puri, with moushumi chatterjee, annu kapoor, om puri, sharat saxena and sudesh berry playing supporting roles. the film grossed at 17 crore and was declared blockbuster by box office india. it was also the second highest grossing bollywood film of 1990.
the film received eight nominations at the 36th filmfare awards ceremony, winning seven of them, including best film, best director for rajkumar santoshi and best actor for sunny deol. in the 38th national film awards, the film won the national film award for best popular film providing wholesome entertainment and sunny deol received the national film award  special mention. ghayal was remade in tamil as bharathan in 1992 with vijaykanth and bhanupriya in lead roles, in telugu as gamyam in 1998 with srikanth and in kannada as vishwa with shivarajkumar and suchitra krishnamurthy.on 5 february 2016, a direct sequel titled ghayal once again was released.


== plot ==
amateur boxer ajay mehra (sunny deol) is living with his brother ashok mehra (raj babbar) and sister-in-law indu verma (moushumi chatterjee) in mumbai. ashok is a businessman who is facing some trouble at his company, but hides this from his wife and brother, ajay. later ajay is sent to bangalore for training.
ajay gets a message that his brother is in bangalore. when he reaches the hotel he finds that ashok has already left without leaving any message for him. later that day he receives a call from ashok, who in an inebriated state, is trying to tell him something which has been troubling him for a long time but the phone cuts abruptly. when he returns from bangalore, he finds that his brother is missing. his inquiries and a police complaint only lead him to frustration and violent outbursts. some time later, he comes across ashok's friend (annu kapoor), a drug addict, who reveals all the dark secrets.
earlier when ashok faced losses in his business, a reputed businessman balwant rai (amrish puri) had come to his rescue. balwant becomes a partner in ashok's company and settles all the debts. this arrangement is in fact a cover for balwant's illegal activities. balwant routinely traps honest people to provide cover for his illegal business and ashok is one of his innocent victims. initially when ashok resists, balwant threatens him of dire consequences, but ashok persists with his requests to shut down illegal trade. later, ashok collects evidence to frame balwant and that's where the trouble starts. balwant kidnaps ashok and tortures him to reveal where he has kept the evidence.
somehow the henchmen of balwant find out ajay's knowledge of this incriminating evidence and balwant instantly kills ashok. ajay is later framed for the murder and accused of having an illicit relationship with his sister-in-law. ajay realises in court that the roots of evil are very deep and even his near ones have turned hostile towards him. his faith in the law is crushed and he seeks justice his own way. his sister-in-law is not able to bear the trauma and cruel comments of her neighbours and commits suicide.
while in jail, ajay makes friends with some other hardcore convicts, who are good at heart. then one day, they escape from the jail by overpowering the guards. then begins ajay's fight for justice, to take down balwant rai. one by one he takes down the cronies of balwant who had framed him in the murder. the film ends with form of poetic justice, where ajay kills balwant in an amusement park in front of people and police, who are meek witnesses.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by bappi lahiri. a woeful version of the song is "saath hain hum sab isse badi kya khushi", sung independently and sedately by kumar sanu. another song, "mungda" rendered tersely in the film, originally occurs in the 1977 film inkaar.


== awards and nominations ==
38th national film awards
won

best popular film providing wholesome entertainment  dharmendra
national film award  special jury award - sunny deol36th filmfare awards
won

best actor  sunny deol
best film  dharmendra
best director  rajkumar santoshi
best story  rajkumar santoshi
best art director  nitish roy
best cinematographer  rajan kothari
best editor  v. n. mayekarnominated

best supporting actor  om puri


== remakes ==
below is a table of the lead characters in the story of ghayal and its remakes.


== trivia ==
the film released along with another blockbuster film dil on same day. dil initially led, but ghayal had a large repeat audience as sunny deol became a famous action hero by 1991. by the end of its full run, ghayal collected more than dil in many circuits.
it has rare feat of collecting more first week of second release than in first release in the mumbai circuit.originally the film was offered to mithun chakraborty who had signed to play the lead. dharmendra who decided to produce the movie personally asked mithun chakraborty if he could step down and allow sunny deol to feature in the film. mithun chakraborty did out of his friendship and respect for dharmendra.


== sequel ==

a sequel named ghayal returns was announced in 2014. but before the film could enter production, it faced financial problems. however, sunny deol stated that he was determined to make the film. after once being stalled and then being postponed several times, the film was finally released with the title, ghayal: once again, on 5 february 2016.


== references ==


== external links ==
ghayal at imdb