girlfriend is an indian hindi film released on 11 june 2004. the film was written and directed by karan razdan and produced by pammi baweja. it focuses on tanya's (isha koppikar) obsessive relationship with sapna (amrita arora), especially after sapna starts dating rahul (aashish chaudhary).


== plot ==
tanya and sapna are good friends. tanya never liked men from the very beginning. tanya and sapna share a relationship which is more than just being friends and they also involved in physical relationship while they were drunk.though sapna never considered tanya a lesbian, she always trusted her as a friend. tanya has strong feelings for sapna and is quite possessive about her and it is not revealed to sapna. a boy named rahul comes in sapna's life and both of them fall in love with each other, they decide to get married. tanya starts  feeling jealous due to the growing closeness of sapna and rahul; she starts getting more and more jealous and her hatred towards rahul and other men increases. one night, rahul is injured when a mysterious masked person attacks him. tanya who is also a kick boxing champion has a fight with a male boxer whom she badly beats. sapna distrusts rahul when he tries to make her understand that tanya loves her, sapna says that when they were drunk they had sexual contact but in real life they are not lesbian couples, they are just close friends.
one day it is revealed to sapna that tanya is really a true lesbian and she loves sapna, sapna starts hating tanya when she comes to know the real identity of tanya, on the same day tanya sneaks into rahul's house and starts beating him badly, tanya says to rahul that she was the masked person who attacked him and she loves sapna so much. sapna arrives in rahul's house and finds tanya covered in blood and rahul lying on the ground unconscious, however rahul regains consciousness and electrocutes tanya. tanya gets consciousness after a few moments and runs towards rahul to try and throw him out of the building's window, rahul steps aside and tanya falls from the window, killing her. in the end rahul and sapna visit tanya's grave and give flowers.


== cast ==
isha koppikar as tanya singh
amrita arora as sapna verma
aashish chaudhary as rahul chaudhary
sumeet nijhawan as sameer
shantanu chappana
dolly malhotra


== soundtrack ==
the music director of the film is daboo malik. the singers include shreya ghosal, sonu nigam, daboo malik, soumya raoh, shaan, kumar sanu, abhijeet, sunidhi chauhan and vaishali samant.


== see also ==
bollywood films of 2004


== references ==


== external links ==
girlfriend at imdb
girlfriend at bollywood hungama