gloria is a 1999 american neo noir crime thriller film directed by sidney lumet and stars sharon stone as gloria. it is a remake of the 1980 film of the same name that was written and directed by john cassavetes. it is also notable as george c. scott's final theatrically-released film.  the supporting cast also includes jeremy northam, cathy moriarty-gentile, bonnie bedelia, and barry mcevoy.


== plot ==
gloria (sharon stone) has just gotten out of prison, where she has served three years to save her boyfriend, kevin (jeremy northam). during her stay in prison, she thinks about how kevin never once visited her. she tells kevin that the relationship is over and that all she wants is the money he promised her for taking the rap for him. he refuses to give it to her.
meanwhile, the gang's accountant has tried to protect himself by creating a computer disk with the names of all those involved in the outfit's criminal activities. the plan backfires, andin trying to get the diskone of kevin's trigger-happy henchmen kills the accountant, his wife, his mother-in-law and his daughter. only his seven-year-old son nicky (jean-luke figueroa) escapes, but is quickly caught and brought to kevin's apartment. it is there that gloria and nicky meet. gloria must decide whether or not to risk her life in order to save the boy.
gloria begins to feel love for the young boy as his innocence and intelligent nature inspires her. she tells him that she hates kids and that is why she doesnt have kids. she lectures him to get used to this world and to grow up on his owns. she then tried to ditch him in a subway, but nicky comes back. as gloria and nicky spend more time together, they both develop feelings for each other. the boy sees news reports of his family being killed by the mob and runs away from the apartment where they were staying. gloria follows nicky and catches him in a subway, taking him back to the room. gloria gets emotional thinking about the boy's heartache over his dead family, and gives him love.


== cast ==
sharon stone as gloria swenson
jean-luke figueroa as nicky
jeremy northam as kevin
cathy moriarty-gentile as diane
george c. scott as ruby
mike starr as sean
bonnie bedelia as brenda
barry mcevoy as terry
don billett as raymond
jerry dean as mickey
tony dibenedetto as zach
teddy atlas as ian
bobby cannavale as jack
sarita choudhury as angela
mriam coln as maria


== reception ==
the movie received negative reviews and stone received a razzie award nomination for worst actress, where she lost to heather donahue for the blair witch project. the film was also a box office bomb grossing only $4,197,729 at the north american box office despite its $30 million budget. gloria currently holds a 14% rating on rotten tomatoes based on 29 reviews.


== references ==


== external links ==
gloria (1999) at imdb
gloria at allmovie
gloria at the tcm movie database
gloria at the american film institute catalog
gloria at rotten tomatoes
gloria at box office mojo