god tussi great ho (transl.god you are great) is a 2008 indian fantasy comedy film, written and directed by rumi jaffery and starring amitabh bachchan, salman khan, priyanka chopra and sohail khan in a friendly appearance. according to director rohit dhawan, the film is inspired from a village folk tale about a brahmin, though most reviewers noted that the film's story-line has similarities with the 2003 hollywood comedy bruce almighty, starring jim carrey, morgan freeman and jennifer aniston. however the film performed poorly at the box office.


== plot ==
arun prajapati (salman khan) has been trying to be a successful tv anchor, but success has always eluded him. he blames god (amitabh bachchan) for this lack of success. arun is head over heels in love with alia kapoor (priyanka chopra), who is a tv anchor and a well-known star working in the same channel, but he has never been able to express his love for her.
when rocky (sohail khan) is appointed as an anchor for the channel, arun starts believing that rocky will win alia. later, arun is sacked from the channel. he has nobody to blame but god himself, whom he later meets in person. an argument ensues between the two, at the end of which god then decides to give arun the power over all things for ten days, wherein arun may prove that he is a better operator of the universe.
arun uses this power to put rocky into an uneasy spot and win alia's heart. after god scolds him for only making things better for himself, arun starts listening to people's prayers. he later realizes that considering each person's wishes individually would be too time-consuming, so to save time and effort he grants everybodys wishes, including the wish of criminals to be free and rocky's wish that alia marries him.
arun later asks god why is everything happening to him. god explains it is his own fault and that everyone cannot blame him for this. arun feels bad, but god forgives him and starts his life over again. during the game show, he tricks rocky into lying about loving alia kapoor (who was present on the show, as it was the channel "zoop"'s first game show), and alia turns on him. arun wins the heart of alia.


== cast ==
amitabh bachchan as god
salman khan as arun prajapati a.k.a. ap a tv reporter who always doesn't do his work carefully and blames god for the mistakes. arun is in love with alia, but gets worried as he thinks rocky will win alia's heart. when arun meets god, the latter gives arun the powers of himself for 10 days to make his life better. in the end, with god's help, arun makes alia realise that rocky is a fraud. thus, arun wins alia's heart.
priyanka chopra as alia kapoor a successful tv bachelor. both arun and alia love and want to marry each other, but soon rocky comes between them and tries to create misunderstandings in their relationship because rocky is in love with alia too.
sohail khan as rakesh sharma a.k.a. rocky a successful tv bachelor. rocky is alia's childhood friend and is in love with her. to win her heart, rocky tries to create misunderstandings between her and arun. but in the end, arun, with the help of god, proves rocky a fraud. so, arun wins alia's heart.
anupam kher as jagmohan prajapati arun's father. he always did not support arun and misunderstands his feelings.
dalip tahil as jagdish kewalchandni arun and alia's boss. he mostly suspends arun from the channel as he didn't do his work carefully.
beena kak as rashmi prajapati arun's mother. she supports arun and always says that he will succeed in his life.
upasana singh as divya prajapati household's maid. she always says bad things about arun including that he will never do his work carefully.
rukhsar rehman as madhu prajapati arun's younger sister. she is irritated by jagmohan's reactions.
sanjay mishra as murari
rajpal yadav as rangeela lottery stall owner


=== special appearance ===
satish kaushik as netaji kewalchandni's client


== box office ==
god tussi great ho was not considered commercially successful. however the movie has emerged as a moderate success on the home video circuit. the film's satellite rights had a long court battle between the producer and shemaroo entertainment.the verdict was in favor with the producer who sold the satellite rights to zee tv


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film is composed by sajidwajid, and the lyrics are penned by jalees sherwani, shabbir ahmed and deven shukla.


=== track listing ===


== references ==


== external links ==
god tussi great ho
god tussi great ho at imdb
god tussi great ho at indiafm.com