god's gift  14 days (korean:    14; rr: sinui sunmul  14il) is a 2014 south korean television series written by choi ran (the writer of iljimae), starring lee bo-young, cho seung-woo, kim tae-woo, jung gyu-woon and kim yoo-bin. it aired on sbs from march 3 to april 22, 2014, on mondays and tuesdays at 21:55 for 16 episodes.


== plot summary ==
kim soo-hyun is a mother whose young daughter han saet-byul gets kidnapped and murdered. discovering a miraculous ability to go back in time exactly two weeks before the event, soo-hyun is determined to expose the kidnapping plot and save her daughter before she dies all over again. helping her is ki dong-chan, a former cop turned private investigator out to prove the innocence of his mentally challenged brother, who is falsely accused of murdering dong-chan's ex-girlfriend. as soo-hyun and dong-chan race against the clock in the allotted 14 days, new light is shed on the crimes, and they uncover secrets far more treacherous than soo-hyun could have ever imagined.


== cast ==


=== main characters ===
lee bo-young as kim soo-hyuna successful tv writer for a current affairs program. she travels back in time to bring her dead child back to life.cho seung-woo as ki dong-chanhe was once an outstanding police officer, who left the force after a certain incident. now a private investigator, dong-chan has a personal connection to the case and helps soo-hyun when she goes back in time.kim tae-woo as han ji-hoonhe is a human rights lawyer who is passionate about his work and is a loving husband to soo-hyun and devoted father to saet-byul. but he is also harboring a secret.jung gyu-woon as hyun woo-jina detective in the violent crimes division, he graduated the police academy at the top of his class and is already known as future police commissioner material. he is soo-hyun's first love, and she suddenly comes to him out of nowhere and begs him to find the suspect who will kill her daughter in two weeks' time. initially disbelieving, he gets sucked into the case and puts his career on the line to help her.kim yoo-bin as han saet-byulsoo-hyun and ji-hoon's daughter. saet-byul is quirky and cute, though a bit of an outsider at school. she doesn't get good grades, but is warm and kind despite the fact that the other kids leave her out and call her the weird kid. her one friend is young-gyu.baro as ki young-gyua developmentally disabled teenage boy with the mental age of a six-year-old. he is saet-byul's friend, and tries to save her from the kidnapper.han sunhwa as jennyshe started out as a con artist who'd already been to jail five times, until dong-chan hired her as a fraud detection expert.


=== supporting characters ===
park hye-sook as jang mi-soonsoo-hyun's mother.kim jin-hee as joo min-ahsoo-hyun's junior colleague who had an affair with ji-hoon. she became pregnant with his child, but miscarried when she fell down the stairs while ji-hoon was forcing her to go to an abortion clinic.jung hye-sun as lee soon-nyeomother of dong-chan and dong-ho. she takes care of her grandson young-gyu.jung eun-pyo as ki dong-hodong-chan's older brother, and young-gyu's father. falsely accused and imprisoned for the murder of dong-chan's girlfriend, soo-jung.shin goo as choo byeong-wooa businessman disguised as a homeless bum.ahn se-ha as na ho-gookdong-chan's junior colleague when he was in the police force.yeon jae-wook as wang byeong-taeexpert hacker who works at dong-chan's private investigator office.kang shin-il as kim nam-joonthe president of south korea.joo jin-mo as lee myeong-hanpresidential chief of staff.ye soo-jung as park ji-youngthe first lady.no min-woo as theoafter witnessing his beloved older brother's suicide, he went into a long period of depression. he decides to fulfill his brother's lifelong dream of becoming a musician in his place, and successfully becomes the front man of the rock band snake. he is saet-byul's favorite idol singer. however, unforeseen events threaten to quash his dreams altogether when the shoe of a missing child is discovered in his van. although he isn't prosecuted as a criminal, he is still considered as a possible suspect in the case.oh tae-kyung as jang moon-soo or chang moon-sooowner of stationery shop.im ji-kyu as ryu jin-woo
jang in-sub as manager
kim min-chan as soo-hyun's junior colleague (ep 1)
lee yeon-kyung as owner of destiny cafe (ep 1)
kim il-joong as mc (ep 12)
lee seung-hyung as tv director/pd (ep 12)
joo ho as kim joon-seo (ep 2)the president's son.kang sung-jin as cha bong-sub (ep 36)serial killer who murdered three women, including young-gyu's mother and dong-ho's friend mimi.kwak jung-wook as han ki-tae (ep 56)
kang byul as ki-tae's girlfriend (ep 6)
choi min-chul
oh tae-kyung
lee si-won as lee soo-jungdong-chan's girlfriend who was murdered.


== original soundtrack ==


== ratings ==
in the table below, the blue numbers represent the lowest ratings and the red numbers represent the highest ratings.


== awards and nominations ==


== international broadcast ==
it aired in thailand on pptv beginning october 7, 2014, dubbed as sibsee wan sawan kamnod . ("14  ").


== remake ==
on december 16, 2016, abc announced a 10 episode straight-to-series order for an american remake of the series which will be titled somewhere between, and will start shooting in vancouver, canada, in march 2017, for an air date in june 2017. it will be written by stephen tolkin (legend of the seeker, brothers & sisters). paula patton, devon sawa and jr bourne are attached as the lead.


== references ==


== external links ==
god's gift  14 days official sbs website (in korean)
god's gift: 14 days at hancinema
god's gift: 14 days at imdb