going overboard is a 1989 american comedy film directed by valerie breiman, and stars adam sandler in his film debut, burt young, allen covert, billy zane, terry moore, milton berle and billy bob thornton in a small role. the film was originally released in 1989, but once sandler became successful after appearing on saturday night live and in the films billy madison and happy gilmore, it was given a wider release by vidmark entertainment in 1996.


== plot ==
shecky moskowitz (sandler) is a struggling comedian working on a cruise ship. shecky gets his chance to be the ship's comedian when it is thought that the regular comedian, dickie diamond (larose), had fallen overboard and drowned. (dickie actually locked himself in the men's room) shecky is nervous about performing, but king neptune (zane) convinces him to go for the opportunity by telling shecky about the power of laughter. shecky's first performance is very unsuccessful as he is booed off the stage, he is especially heckled by the construction worker dave (thornton).  however, after a lecture by milton berle, shecky succeeds in making the audience laugh. at that point, the terrorists come onboard and want to kill miss australia. shecky, remembering the advice about the power of laughter, saves her by promising to put the assassins in a film.


== cast ==
adam sandler as shecky moskowitz
tia khalil as gen. noriega
tom hodges as bob
scott larose as dickie diamond
allen covert as bartender
billy zane as king neptune
terry moore as mistress
milton berle (credited) as himself
billy bob thornton as dave
dan povenmire as yellow teeth
steven brill as priest
peter berg as mort ginsberg
adam rifkin as croaker / miss spain
gabe sachs as funeral moaner
ricky paull goldin as terrorist without shirt
warren selko as terrorist with mustache


== reception ==
on rotten tomatoes the film has 4 reviews listed, all are negative.david nusair of reel film reviews gave it 0 out of 4 and called "...a slapdash and thoroughly amateurish piece of work that suffers from a total dearth of positive attributes."
j.r. taylor of entertainment weekly gave it a grade d. as of 2021, the film is 15 in imdb's list of the bottom 100 films on the website.


== references ==


== external links ==
going overboard at imdb
going overboard at allmovie