golmaal: fun unlimited (transl.hotchpotch) is a 2006 indian hindi-language comedy film directed by rohit shetty and written by neeraj vora. the first installment of golmaal film series, it stars ajay devgn, arshad warsi, sharman joshi and tusshar kapoor along with rimi sen and paresh rawal. golmaal was released on 14 july 2006 at an investment of 120 million. it was declared "super-hit" and collected worldwide earnings of 465 million.
the film is based on mihir bhuta's gujarati play aflatoon which was based on harsh shivsharan's marathi play ghar ghar which had earlier been adapted into 2001 malayalam film kakkakuyil. the opening comedy sequences were later used in the kannada film mast maja maadi.


== plot ==
the story revolves around the lives of gopal (ajay devgn), lucky (tusshar kapoor), madhav (arshad warsi) and laxman (sharman joshi).
laxman is a brilliant student who is diverted from his studies by his mischievous band of friends, gopal, madhav, and lucky. gopal is the muscle of the group, madhav is the brain, and lucky is the right one but a mute. the three friends use laxman's hostel room for their mischievous activities. laxman is peer-pressured into running a series of scams to earn himself and his friends some money and is punished by being thrown out of college. the naughty foursome then finds refuge in the bungalow of a blind couple, somnath (paresh rawal) and mangala (sushmita mukherjee), who are waiting for their grandson, sameer, inheriting their paternal grandparents' treasure chest hidden in the old couple's house. gopal pretends to be sameer returning from america, and enters the house, while the other three friends sneak in hidden.
a cat-and-mouse game unfolds as laxman's body and gopal's voice make up sameer. each time the blind dadaji comes amidst them, hilarious situations arise. enter nirali (rimi sen), the saucy girl-next-door, and the group now have time, place and 'resources' to fall in love. their efforts at winning the lady's heart fail. apart from their romantic interests, there is a quest for the chest. there is also a gangster named babli who wants to steal the chest from the couple's bungalow. all his attempts are unintentionally and unknowingly thwarted by the foursome.
after the foursome finds a chest hidden behind an old painting in the house, despite laxman pleading not to open the chest, somnath reveals about sameer's death to gopal, laxman, madhav, and lucky. the real sameer, along with his parents, was killed in a car crash after his father and mother left with him for india to meet his grandparents, after somnath's son learned that somnath and mangala were permanently blinded in a lethal accident. somnath goes to america and lights the pyres of his son, daughter-in-law and grandson, the ashes of whom he later kept in an urn, as per the hindu tradition which he kept in the chest. mangala is shocked to hear the stories, breaks into tears and condemns her husband for lying to her all those years and not allowing her to cradle her grandson or light the pyres, and she also condemns the foursome for tricking her and hurting her feelings. babli then arrives with his gang and later reveals that he hid the diamonds in the urn somnath was carrying his grand returned to india and arrived at an airport. panducharang, an assassin previously sent by babli as an undercover servant later joins gopal's team and fights the gangsters off, with the fight finally ending with gopal being accidentally stabbed by babli in his butt with a knife, and falling unconscious soon after, but not before warning madhav, lucky and laxman to not touch the knife, leaving the three friends in laughter. babli also falls unconscious after seeing blood flowing from gopal's behind.
after being admitted to a hospital, gopal finally has the knife removed from his butt, and babli is arrested for his crimes. laxman, gopal, madhav and lucky are then rewarded with ten per cent of the original value of the diamonds for arresting babli. nirali then chooses lucky as her husband-to-be, saying that she wants a partner who only listen her, found true love and loyalty in him and him alone, leaving the remaining three disappointed.


== cast ==
ajay devgn as gopal / sameer 1, who voices sameer
arshad warsi as madhav singh ghai
sharman joshi as laxman / sameer 2, who fakes being sameer's body in front of somnath and mangala
tusshar kapoor as lucky
rimi sen as nirali
paresh rawal as somnath, sameer's grandfather
sushmita mukherjee as mangala, sameer's grandmother
manoj joshi as harishchandra ramchandra mirchandani a.k.a. harami, dean of laxman's institute
mukesh tiwari as vasooli bhai
sanjay mishra as babli bhai
vrajesh hirjee as pandurang / sameer 3, somnath and managala' ex-servant
siddarth jadhav as sattu supari, babli bhai's contract killer


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
sukanya varma of rediff said the film was "one wacky, goofy, paisa vasool ride" and that "the humour isn't exactly family audience material, and is more likely to be lapped up by college-going folk", rating the movie 3/5. subhash k jha of sify wrote that "golmaal's neatly structured ambit of asinine anarchy tickles the funny-bone, it finally says nothing about the quality of modern life that we haven't already heard in all those blasts from the past that have come in recent weeks trying to create a ripple across our sense of humour." taran adarsh of bollywood hungama said that "golmaal is a thoroughly enjoyable fare, the film has all it takes to hit the bull's eye" rating it 3.5/5.


=== box office ===
golmaal grossed 46.5 crore (us$6.5 million) worldwide. at the end of its run, the movie was considered somewhat successful. it was a hit at the box office grossing about 290 million on a budget of 12 million.


== other ==
shortly following the film's release microsoft's skype decided to include an emoji for golmaal as well as several other bollywood emojis in an effort to appeal to users in india and to honor indian culture.


== soundtrack ==
music composed by vishal - shekhar, lyrics penned by vishal dadlani & kumaar


== sequel ==
the film spawned a sequel titled golmaal returns, which released on 29 october 2008. the sequel received mixed reviews from critics but had a bumper opening in india and grossed a total more than the original, and was declared a hit. on 5 november 2010, the third sequel titled golmaal 3 was released, which broke many records. the film was declared a blockbuster, and was the highest-grossing installment in the golmaal film series until the fourth, golmaal again, came out on 20 october 2017.


== legacy ==
golmaal again, the fourth installment of the series and the film's third sequel, has many references lifted from the film; among these, however, the recurring reference of the "jamnadas orphanage", which was used in the film and its second sequel golmaal 3, is explored in detail in golmaal again as part of its core plot. ajay devgan,arshad warsi,tushar kapoor and mukesh tiwari play gopal, madhav, lucky and vasooli in all the 4 movies.


== notes ==


== external links ==
official movie website, archived from http://www.golmaalthefilm.com
golmaal: fun unlimited at imdb