golmaal again (transl.hotchpotch again) is a 2017 indian hindi-language action comedy film directed by rohit shetty and produced by rohit shetty pictures, mangal murti films and reliance entertainment. made on a total budget of 69 crores including production and marketing costs, it is the fourth installment of the golmaal franchise and stars ajay devgn, parineeti chopra, tabu, arshad warsi, tusshar kapoor, shreyas talpade and kunal khemu.filming began in march 2017, and the movie was theatrically released worldwide with a runtime of 152 minutes on diwali 2017. despite clashing with aamir khan's secret superstar, golmaal again became one of the year's highest grossers and was a blockbuster at the box office. its lifetime domestic net collection was more than 205 crores, while the worldwide gross ended at 311 crores.


== plot ==
gopal (ajay devgan) who is afraid of ghosts, madhav (arshad warsi), lucky (tushar kapoor) who cannot speak, laxman (kunal khemu) and laxman (shreyas talpade) who has a speech impediment are orphans living in an orphanage in ooty managed by a businessman named jamnadas (uday tikekar). one night, the boys find a baby girl at their entrance and take her in, naming her khushi. they take care of her and are also aware of librarian anna's (tabu) ability to see ghosts and spirits. one day, when madhav pranks and scares the timid gopal in an empty bungalow, a fight ensues between the boys. gopal gets punished, which prompts gopal and laxman to leave the orphanage, and soon, madhav, lucky and laxman also do the same. khushi is later adopted by the loving colonel chauhan and his wife.
some years later, gopal and laxman work with babli bhai (sanjay mishra) and madhav, lucky and laxman work with vasooli bhai (mukesh tiwari). the group reunites after learning about jamnadas' demise. returning to the orphanage after 25 years, they meet col. chauhan, anna and pappi (johnny lever), another orphan from the orphanage who has frequent memory loss. they meet a girl who they think is the bungalow's caretaker, damini (parineeti chopra) and learn about khushi's demise. at an event after jamnadas' funeral, businessman vasu reddy (prakash raj) reveals the orphanage would be demolished and moved elsewhere in plans to make his own building. when the group leaves the orphanage and returns, a ghost possesses laxman and speak in nana patekar's voice which scares gopal. next, the ghost possesses madhav and prompts vasooli to give them a task, indirectly bringing the three back to ooty. a scared gopal calls anna, who reveals that there is a spirit in their house and suggests him and laxman to move to col. chauhan's house. upon reaching ooty, the two groups start fighting each other out of anger. the three try to scare gopal into leaving the house, but gopal gets possessed and beats lucky and laxman badly. later, vasu reddy assigns madhav, lucky and laxman to burn down the house. but things go awry when lucky gets possessed by the spirit and starts talking, which scares the group. the two groups then decide to leave, but anna and damini convince them to stay for the birthday celebration, and the group makes amends. the four find that gopal has fallen in love with damini and force him to confess his feelings. pappi arrives and reveals that the girl they assumed to be damini is actually khushi, who is dead, while the real damini is pappi's girlfriend. the boys get terrified and try to escape the house along with pappi, babli bhai and vasooli bhai after damini confesses it herself. anna arrives and stops them and explains to them that the ghost is none other than their childhood friend khushi.
a flashback narrated by khushi explains how her boyfriend, nikhil surana (neil nitin mukesh), a young businessman and jamnadas' nephew, killed him in order to obtain the orphanage in his name and demolish it for the construction of a site. upon confronting him and threatening to go to the police, khushi was strangled to death by nikhil. with the help of vasu reddy, he managed to prove the killings to be accidents. however, khushi's spirit came for help to anna, who was surprised that the boys could see khushi and eventually brought them to the house to help get justice for khushi.
back to the present, gopal thrashes the goons sent by vasu reddy while the rest of the boys, who wanted to stay away from the matter, get emotionally convinced to stay. they convince gopal to stop chasing the goons and later almost manage to scare vasu into confessing the truth, but nikhil arrives before they can and reveals there's no evidence to prove him guilty. this leads to a fight, during which khushi attacks and nearly kills nikhil but is calmed down by anna, and vasu convinces nikhil to confess. with the orphanage saved, khushi's spirit departs to heaven after bidding goodbye to the boys and anna.


== cast ==


== production ==
in july 2016, rohit shetty and ajay devgn announced the fourth installment of golmaal series. for the female lead role, shetty again wanted to cast kareena kapoor who played the heroine in golmaal 2 & golmaal 3. however, she stepped out owing to her pregnancy and parineeti chopra was roped in. after tabu's entry in the film, neil nitin mukesh was confirmed for the antagonistic part. prakash raj joined the film in february 2017.principal photography commenced at mumbai in march 2017. first schedule ended in april 2017. the film wrapped up in july 2017, and post-production work was finished in the last week of august 2017.


=== themes ===
on 18 october, the theme song "itna sannata kyu hai" was released.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
the film received mixed reviews from critics with praise for its humour and performances and criticism for its flaws in the technical aspects.
meena iyer of the times of india gave the film 3.5 stars and stated that the film is full of laughs with no substance. raja sen of ndtv gave the film 2 stars, stating that golmaal again is "a marginally better film than golmaal 3 and golmaal returns" but felt the film was too long. rajeev masand of news 18 gave the film 2 out of 5 stars and said, "mercifully no cars are spun around like tops and exploded this time around, but the characters repeatedly bandy about the film's message like a disclaimer, as if warning you not to expect any more than they promise to deliver: no logic, only magic. logic indeed is in short supply here, and frankly, the real magic the filmmakers conjure up is the ability to keep this franchise on the road for all these years with such minimal creative investment."


=== box office ===
on its opening day, golmaal again grossed 30.10 crore net, one of the highest openings for a bollywood film in 2017. the film collected 28.25 on the second day. the third day's collection was 28.5 crore. on the fourth day, the film collected 15.25 crore, taking the total collections to 102.85 crore. on the fifth day, the film collected 13.25 crore. the sixth day's collection of the film was 10.5 crore.by the end of the first week, the film grossed 135 crore. the third week's gross was 1974 million. golmaal again grossed 200 crore after four weeks of its release in indian box office. the film grossed us$3 million in its first weekend in overseas. the film grossed $160,000 in nepal, and $400,000 in pakistan in the first weekend. the worldwide collection of the film was 3 billion in its fourth week. also it is the highest-grossing indian film in fiji. the film became the highest-grossing bollywood film of 2017 until tiger zinda hai broke its record in 2017. golmaal again ran in cinemas for more than 50 days in india.


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film have been composed by amaal mallik, s. thaman, lijo george-dj chetas and abhishek arora while the lyrics of the film have been penned by kumaar. the first track of the film titled as "golmaal (title track)" sung by brijesh shandilya and aditi singh sharma was released on 23 september 2017. the second track of the film "neend churai meri" from the 1997 film ishq has been recreated to "maine tujhko dekha" for this film in the voices of neeraj shridhar and sukriti kakar and was released on 29 september 2017. the soundtrack was released on 6 october 2017 by t-series.
all lyrics are written by kumaar.


== release ==
20 october 2017 was announced as release date of the film, coinciding with diwali.


== see also ==

list of hindi comedy films
list of hindi horror films


== references ==


== external links ==
golmaal again at imdb
golmaal again at bollywood hungama