good luck is a 2000 indian tamil-language romantic drama film written, directed and produced by manoj bhatnaghar. the movie stars prashanth, riya sen and raghuvaran in lead roles.


== plot ==
surya (prashanth) is a carefree youth living in malaysia with his brother chandramohan (raghuvaran) and sister-in-law devi (sukanya). chandramohan and devi are childless because of a problem with chandramohan.  surya falls in love with dancer priya (riya sen) and manages to steal her heart too. just when things seem happy, a bombshell is dropped by a sister mary who tells surya that he is the father of a small girl pooja. pooja must undergo an operation to save her life but insists on seeing her dad before agreeing to the operation. surya agrees to pose as her dad and is forced to do so on a more permanent basis even after the operation is done because he comes to know that his brother chandramohan is really father of pooja.he at first insist his brother and sister-in-law to adapt pooja as they are childless but they get information that pooja is surya's daughter. his brother and sister-in-law gets angry and she says the truth that they are childless because of the problem with her and not his brother but still he has great heart of accepting her still and the blame on himself. surya is driven out of the house and loses priya, who agrees to wed an earlier suitor, shyam (sanjay asrani).their wedding is arranged in a cruise ship in a grand manner chandramohan and his family is invited to the marriage. unexpectedly surya also works in the same ship with his daughter. many incidents make priya understand that surya is good and has true love for her in his heart.whereas pooja's mother's father wants to kill the one who cheated his daughter thinks surya as the traitor and enters the ship to kill him. the next day surya moves off from his cabinet to starts his works leaving pooja alone. suddenly when walking near swimming pool pooja faint and fall into the pool. but she gets noticed by chandramohan, his wife and priya. they save her and priya knows pooja as surya's daughter and so take her to his cabin where while browsing pooja's medical reports chandramohan gets to know that pooja is not surya's daughter but his own daughter and apologizes to his wife devi. whereas at the same time pooja's maternal grandfather kidnaps surya to kill him for cheating his daughter but he is rescued in time by police. he runs to his cabin and learns what had happened and moves to convince his sister-in-law. she finally gets convinced and accepts pooja. the film ends with surya and priya reuniting.


== cast ==
prashanth as surya
riya sen as priya
raghuvaran as chandra mohan
sukanya as devi
vivek
vaiyapuri
vinu chakravarthy as surya's uncle
sindhu (actress) as sangeetha rajan
sanjay asrani as shyam
diyana
pandu
sabitha anand as sister mary


== production ==
the film was initially set to feature mayuri kango as the lead heroine, but she was later replaced by riya sen. the entire film was shot in thailand and malaysia, while significant portions were shot on a cruise ship sponsored by star cruises.


== soundtrack ==
the film score and the soundtrack were composed by director manoj bhatnaagar himself and the lyrics were written by vairamuthu. the soundtrack, released in december 1999, features 6 tracks with keyaar and k. t. kunjumon attending the audio launch function as chief guests.


== release ==
the film received mixed reviews from critics and did not fare well commercially at the box office. despite the relative failure of the film, manoj bhatnagar announced his next film soon after, a collaboration with actor madhavan, which then failed to take off.


== references ==