good boy bad boy is a 2007 indian hindi-language comedy film directed by ashwini chaudhary, starring emraan hashmi, tusshar kapoor, tanushree dutta, isha sharvani and paresh rawal. produced by raju farooqui under the banner of mukta arts ltd, the film is a remake of the 1992 film class act starring kid 'n play. this film marks the third collaboration between the lead actors tanushree dutta and emraan hashmi after aashiq banaya aapne and chocolate.


== plot ==
raju malhotra (emraan hashmi) and rajan malhotra (tusshar kapoor) study in the same college but are poles apart in every trait. while raju is a brat, poor in studies but good in sports, rajan is a brilliant student but a zero in extracurricular activities. the college they study in has a new and strict principal mr. awasthi (paresh rawal) who wants to transform this ill-reputed college into a most flocked one. hence he divides the students according to their merit. so while raju is fit for c section, for poorly faring students, rajan easily gets access to the a section with his 90% marks. but raju falls for a girl in a-section and hence swaps his place with a hesitant rajan who enters c-section for the first time in his life. mr. awasthi comes to know of this and decides to teach them a lesson by sending their names to a quiz and dance competition. so now, geeky rajan will have to dance while brat raju will have to answer question hurled at him. what will raju and rajan do? will they accept the challenge or just scoot off?


== cast ==
emraan hashmi as rajveer "raju" malhotra / rajan malhotra
tusshar kapoor as rajveer "raju" malhotra / rajan malhotra
tanushree dutta as dinky kapur
isha sharvani as rashmi awasthi
paresh rawal as principal diwanchand "diwan" awasthi
manu malik as raj
rakesh bedi as mr. prem malhotra
navni parihar as mrs. prem malhotra
anang desai as mr. p.k. malhotra
prabha sinha as mrs. p.k. malhotra
kabir sadanand as willyboy
sushmita mukherjee as prof. bebo chatterjee
jennifer mayani as jenny
ambika chaudhary as deepti
rajesh balwani as philosophy teacher
nazzar abdulla as psychology teacher
amita chandekar as prof. julie
ghanshyam garg as fakira
ajay thakur
anuj gill
punit aneja
ajay dixit
abhishek rawat
tarul swami


== soundtrack ==
all music composed by himesh reshammiya. lyrics peened by sameer, music label : tips industries


== external links ==
good boy, bad boy at imdb