goutham nanda is a 2017 indian telugu-language action-drama film written and directed by sampath nandi. produced by j bhagavan and j pulla rao under sri balaji cine media banner, the film stars gopichand in a double role along with hansika motwani and catherine tresa. it also features mukesh rishi, sachin khedekar, and nikitin dheer in pivotal roles. the film has music composed by s. thaman.
the narrative revolves around two lookalikes, goutham and nanda, who meet while trying to end their lives. goutham is a billionaire's spoiled son who wants to feel emotions and nanda is a poverty-stricken techie who wants to become a billionaire. they decide to swap their identities for a month and eventually face challenges from each other's respective enemies as they both start savoring the lives they wanted to live.
goutham nanda was released theatrically on 28 july 2017. it received praise for the production values, action sequences, performances, music, dialogues and technical aspects. despite failing commercially, it became the highest grossing film in gopichand's career.


== plot ==
goutham ghattamaneni (gopichand) is the only son of ghattamaneni vishnu prasad (sachin khedekar), the 50th richest billionaire in the world. he does not have any emotions and leads a luxurious life in bengaluru, karnataka. mugdha (catherine tresa), the daughter of vishnu prasad's business partner mudra (mukesh rishi), is deeply in love with goutham. in a party, a waiter (tanikella bharani) spills food on his jeans, making goutham slap and insult him. the waiter calls him a spoiled brat who doesn't know himself, leading goutham to realize that he does not have any individual identity without his father. in an attempt to end his life, he crashes his car into another person, who turns out to be nanda kishore (portrayed by gopichand again).
both of them reveal their stories to each other. nanda hails from a lower-middle-class family, living in a slum in hyderabad with his parents (chandra mohan & seetha) and sister (shreeradhe khanduja), along with spoorthi (hansika motwani), who is in love with him. nanda's aspiration to develop an app fails, due to which his father sends him to bangalore to get a job. however, he chooses to end his life which would enable his family to claim insurance. now, goutham is also fed-up with an opulent lifestyle and wants to feel the emotions of living in poverty. both of them decide to exchange their lives for a month, which would expose them to experience the lifestyle that they have been craving for, after which goutham would be introduced to the world as the sole heir of his father's wealth. they spend a night in a hotel learning about each other and fitting into each others shoes to begin their new lives.
goutham starts off rough, but with some words from nanda's father for not taking up a job and returning home but living with nanda's family, he experiences all the emotions that he has been longing for and helps them by being a better son than nanda could ever be. on the other hand, nanda has the perfect beginning, with the exception of a few questions from his staff. goutham starts to fall for spoorthi and nanda for mugdha. meanwhile, mudra and goutham's chief of security gowda (nikitin dheer) plan to kill goutham. after a failed attempt to kill nanda (who they think is goutham), they realize that goutham had switched places with nanda and plan to finish him off him in hyderabad. they make several attempts at killing goutham, though they fail. goutham realizes that even nanda is trying to kill him when he found out an imprint of one of his own expensive shoes on the mud, even though his family (nandas) is collateral damage. when confronted about the same, nanda confesses that he did all this for money and so he had joined hands with mudra and gowda when he found out that the duo was trying to kill him.
soon, nanda frames goutham by publicly murdering their slum corporator's son, but goutham escapes the cops and confronts nanda in the presence of his family (gouthams), who were manipulated by nanda (whom they think is goutham). they fail to recognize that nanda is in gouthams place, and they hand goutham over to the cops. goutham escapes the cops with the help of mugdha, who knows that he is goutham. they arrive at the spot where spoorthi has been held hostage by nanda, who also kills mudra. a fight breaks out between goutham, nanda and gowda which leads to the deaths of gowda followed by another fight on the helipad in which nanda ends up dead by falling off. later, goutham is introduced as the legal heir to his fathers wealth but he announces his venturing towards the path of humanity and donates the entire wealth to a charity, and when asked for an autograph he signs goutham nanda. mugdha is made the ceo to his father's company, and he shares his life with nanda's parents and spoorthi. the film ends with gautama buddha's saying greed for money is the root of all evil.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music composed by s. thaman. the soundtrack was released by zee music company.


== references ==


== external links ==
goutham nanda at imdb