guest house paradiso is a 1999 british slapstick black comedy film written by and starring comic duo rik mayall and adrian edmondson, and directed by edmondsonhis directorial debut for a feature film.the film is a spin-off of their bbc comedy television series bottom (in some territories, the dvd cover refers to it as richie and eddie's bottom movie). mayall and edmondson reprise their roles from the series respectively as richie and eddie, albeit with different surnames. the film was made at ealing studios and on location on the isle of wight, off military road a3055, between the villages of afton and brighstone.


== plot ==
richard "richie" twat (rik mayall) and edward "eddie" elizabeth ndingombaba (adrian edmondson) run the worst guest house in the united kingdom. their staff include a chef, an idiotic drunkard and an illegal immigrant who is unable to cook, and a waiter, who is implied to have checked into a psychiatric hospital. both leave because of nonpayment for their employment, with the latter quitting because of the verbal abuse from his boss. the guests, including mr johnson (bill nighy), who reside in the pair's hotel are thoroughly dissatisfied by the poor service especially richie's rudeness, and eventually decide to leave, except for the senile mrs foxfur (fenella fielding), who lives there.
life seems bleak for richie and eddie, until it seemingly improves with the arrival of the "nice family", headed by mr nice (simon pegg), and the famous italian actress gina carbonara (hlne mahieu).  the nice family are staying as it is the cheapest hotel in the country, and gina's decision to stay in the grotty house is primarily down to her need to seek safety from her ill-tempered fianc gino bolognese (vincent cassel). without the chef, the duo are forced to cook meals for the guests; luckily, however, richie comes across some fish which fell off a military lorry, heading away from the nearby nuclear power station. unknown to both him and eddie, the fish had been contaminated by a radiation leak due to the power station's poor maintenance and equally poor safety regulations.
thanks to the pair promoting her stay to attract more guests, gino eventually finds her, and after an elopement between the two, gino attempts to rape gina. meanwhile, hours after serving the radioactive fish, everybody becomes violently ill, projectile-vomiting at high velocity and in huge quantities  all except for gina carbonara, the only guest who did not eat the fish due to gino eating it all for himself. in a getaway, richie and eddie quickly pack their bags, and are serendipitously reunited with gina, who they escape with. in an act of spontaneous nausea, every guest projectile-vomits on gino at once, forcing him backwards out through a window and off a cliff into the ocean, killing him. government agents arrive to hush up the incident and give eddie and richie 10 million pounds, first-class tickets to the caribbean, and new identities for both them and gina, in exchange for their silence over the leak. the three accept the offer and head to the caribbean and start a beach bar called "beach bar paradisdo". in the film's final scene, eddie winks to the camera after commenting "how lucky [gino] was the only fatality. otherwise there'd be a moral question-mark hanging over our escape."


== cast ==
rik mayall as richard "richie" twat or thwaite
adrian edmondson as edward "eddie" elizabeth ndingombaba
vincent cassel as gino giuseppe bolognese
hlne mahieu as gina tortellini carbonara
bill nighy as mr. johnson
kate ashfield as ms. hardy
simon pegg as mr. nice
fenella fielding as mrs. foxfur
lisa palfrey as mrs. nice
steve o'donnell as chef lardy barsto
james d'arcy as newly wedded husband
kate loustau as newly wedded wife
paul garcia as screen lover


== background ==
prior to the film's production in 1998, rik mayall was involved in a quad bike accident, landing him in a coma and nearly killing him. during his hospitalization, mayall and edmondson began writing the script for the movie and were inspired to write the hotel backdrop after their stays at some during their tours of the bottom live shows.


== reception ==
empire gave the film a 2 out of 5 star rating, stating that "the boys toil incredibly hard to make the whole thing work and, while there are some hilarious moments, it is far too patchy for a full feature film."


== references ==


== external links ==
guest house paradiso at imdb
guest house paradiso at rotten tomatoes