guinevere  is a 1999 american drama film about the artistic and romantic relationship between a young student and her older mentor.
the film was written and directed by audrey wells (in her feature directorial debut) and stars stephen rea, sarah polley, jean smart, and gina gershon. the film was a 1999 sundance film festival jury prize nominee. it won the waldo salt screenwriting award for wells' screenplay, which she shared with frank whaley's script for joe the king. it was also entered into the 21st moscow international film festival.


== plot ==
harper sloane is a misfit in her snobbish, upperclass family of lawyers. she has just been accepted to harvard law school. at her sister's wedding, after being sent out from her hiding place in the storage room with a bottle of champagne, she meets connie fitzpatrick, a bohemian photographer who takes an instant liking to her and nicknames her "guinevere". her visit to his loft in order to pick up the wedding photographs soon blossoms into a full-blown affair, and harper eventually moves in with connie as he instructs her in the ways of art, in particular photography.
after a brutal confrontation with harper's mother, deborah, and harper's discovery that connie has a history of relationships with young women, the film comes to a climax in a downtrodden l.a. hotel where connie ends the relationship by kicking out harper. she returns only once, five years later, as he is dying from cirrhosis of the liver, and meets the other guineveres he has had. on the rooftop, she describes her personal view of his kind of heaven, which she affectionately titles "the connie special".


== cast ==
sarah polley as harper sloane
stephen rea as connie fitzpatrick
jean smart as deborah sloane
gina gershon as billie
paul dooley as walter
carrie preston as patty
tracy letts as zack
emily procter as susan sloane
sharon mcnight as leslie (as sharon mcnight)
gedde watanabe as ed
carlton wilborn as jay
sandra oh as cindy
jasmine guy as linda


== references ==


== external links ==
guinevere at imdb
guinevere at rotten tomatoes
guinevere at box office mojo