gunde jaari gallanthayyinde (transl.heart slipped and lost) is a 2013 indian telugu-language romantic comedy film directed debutante vijay kumar konda and written by harsha vardhan. produced by n. nikitha reddy under the banner of shresht movies, the film stars nithiin, nithya menen, and isha talwar. anoop rubens composed the music while i. andrew and prawin pudi handled the cinematography and editing respectively.
the film's title is inspired from the song "dil se" from gabbar singh (2012). the film was a success at the box office, emerging as a consecutive successful film for nithiin after ishq, which also starred nithya menen. the film was dubbed and released in hindi as heart attack 2 in 2018 and in malayalam as magic love. in 2015, the film was remade in kannada as khushi khushiyagi.


== plot ==
karthik (nithin) is a carefree guy who believes that one should make his own decisions. at his friend pandu's (ali) wedding reception, he sees sruthi (isha talwar) and become interested in her at first sight. he asks pandu's wife to find out about sruthi. after pandu's wife gives sruthi's number to pandu and asks him to convey it to karthik, a miscommunication between karthik and pandu leads to karthik calling sravani (nithya menen). karthik mistakes sravani for sruthi and talks to her over the phone. unbeknownst to him, sravani knows who karthik is and develops an interest in him.
but a series of events clears karthik's confusion and everything is revealed. meanwhile, karthik helps his friend madhu (madhunandan) in gaining a girl's attention; the girl none other than sruthi, who falls for madhu. comedic events lead to madhu doubting sruthi, and their relationship is at stake. later they unite.
meanwhile, sravani plans to avenge the deception and pain that karthik put her through. she gains employment as karthik's boss and decides to put him through the same hardships and even attempts to seducing him. however, karthik wants to propose to his boss (sravani) and sravani is ready to reject his proposal to avenge her pain. just before he proposes, karthik realizes he is truly in love with his phone friend sravani and runs to her house to plead for her forgiveness. there he sees sravani and they unite with a hug.


== cast ==
nithin as karthik
nithya menen as sravani / bangaram
isha talwar as sruthi
ali as pandu
thagubothu ramesh
madhunandan as madhu
raghubabu
ahuti prasad as shravani's father
sudha as sravani's mother
duvvasi mohan
sandya janak
arun kumar
jwala gutta in a special appearance in the song "ding ding ding"


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by anup rubens and was released in hyderabad on 27 march 2013. the soundtrack was distributed by shreyas music. krishna chaitanya penned four songs for the film. producer dil raju was the chief guest and launched the audio cd. a. karunakaran, nandini reddy, surender reddy, kona venkat, bandla ganesh, and jwala gutta were other guests at the audio launch. "yemaindho yemo ee vela", a hit song from pawan kalyan's tholi prema, was remixed in the movie.


== reception ==
the movie completed 100 days in 18 centres all over andhra pradesh and telangana state respectively .


== box office ==
the movie was created on a budget of  8.2 crores and was released in over 450 theatres worldwide, collecting  25.09 crores and becoming the biggest hit in nithiin's career.


== awards ==
filmfare awards southbest actress  telugu - nithya menen
nominated  best film  telugu - nikitha reddy, vikram goud
nominated  best actor  telugu - nitin
nominated - best supporting actress  telugu-isha talwar


== references ==


== external links ==
gunde jaari gallanthayyinde at imdb