gundello godari is a 2013 indian adventure drama film directed by kumar nagendra and produced by lakshmi manchu. the film stars aadhi pinisetty, taapsee pannu, lakshmi manchu, and sundeep kishan. the film was shot simultaneously in telugu and tamil languages, with the latter titled  maranthen mannithen.the film was released on 8 march 2013 while the tamil version was released on 23 march 2013. manchu won critical accolades for her performance winning filmfare award for best supporting actress  telugu and  siima award for best supporting actress in telugu  the telugu version got positive response at the box office, and was showcased at the daring independent film festival, toronto. the film was also nominated for best film at the international indian film festival in south africa.


== plot ==
the story of the film is loosely based on a novel named godavari kathalu, written by bvs rama rao. the film is set in 1986, in bangarappeta village near rajahmundry. malli (aadhi) and chitra (lakshmi manchu) are a newly-wed couple who are forced to battle it out against a devastating flood of the river godavari. they lose all hope of survival, and decide to narrate the darkest moments of their lives to each other after they find a support to rest on.
first, malli narrates his story to chitra. malli is an honest fisherman who works under sambasivayya, a shrewd man at the port. malli's ambition is to own a fishing boat for which he strives hard. his encounter with sarala (taapsee pannu), the daughter of sambasivayya, leads to certain disturbances in his life as sarala, who lusts after malli, blackmails him to escort her to a film and if not, she will report their intimacy to her father. malli escorts her and finally tells that her that he can't go much further as his life and ambition is getting disturbed due to her. that night, police arrest malli for preparing illegal ganja. malli is fired from his job, his mother loses confidence in him. he finds out that chandra, a fellow fisherman prepared ganja. chandra, after being beaten up by malli, confesses that sambasivayya has ordered him to do so as he felt that sarala and malli are in love. an enraged malli goes to sambasivayya's home to settle the score but finds that he is not in town. sarala challenges an inebriated malli as he is walking away after threatening to outrage her modesty by saying, "you seem to have forgotten that you are a man after the beating you got from police due to my dad." thus malli makes love to sarala that night only out of anger on her dad before learning that sarala is going to marry soon.
chitra, after patiently listening to his story, starts telling her story. chitra was found by a couple when she was 4 years old. they took her to their house and chitra started being friendly with their son suri. due to financial problems, suri's mother starts an illicit relationship with the town's doctor in order to gain money, which is misunderstood by suri. thus suri starts hating his mother along with his father, getting much closer to chitra. years pass by and suri (sundeep kishan), now a man, is a mason and is extremely fond of cock-fights while chitra works under dhorababu (ravi babu), a womaniser. one day, chitra and suri's mother go to the doctor's clinic. there, the doctor misbehaves with chitra and the ladies leave the clinic, which is seen by suri. suri misunderstands that chitra is also romantically involved with the doctor and starts roaming with bangari (suja varunee) a native of that town, much to the agony of chitra. meanwhile, suri's mother passes away and chitra's marriage is held with an old man. chitra pleads suri to annul the marriage and suri refuses by telling her what he saw at the doctor's place. chitra tells the truth, thus leading a change of suri's heart. that night, dhorababu tries to molest chitra only to be attacked by suri. suri proposes to chitra but is attacked by his father. suri attempts to kill his father but instead is injured fatally. though chitra reaches the hospital with suri, she finds that the doctor who was lusting for her is serving there. she offers herself for a night and the doctor goes to treat him. suri dies of extreme blood loss and chitra attacks the doctor by pouring hot water on him.
thus, malli and chitra realize their love and wish to live together. but as fate would have it, the support breaks. malli succeeds in finding a bridge and stands on it. he finds chitra drifting by and rescues her. both reach the top of the bridge and are filled with joy that they are alive and together. they throw the ring gifted by sarala and the chain presented by dhorababu on their marriage into the flood and start crossing the bridge.


== cast ==


== production ==
the project was first reported in january 2011, where it was claimed that lakshmi manchu would produce a love film titled gundello godari, which would feature her as the protagonist for the first time. in april 2011, ilaiyaraaja was signed on to compose the music for the film and he recorded songs during a trip with the producers to munnar. ravi babu was hired to play a vital negative role in the film. the film is based on the lives of four people during the 1986 floods in godavari districts.the first schedule of the film began in rajahmundry in january 2012, while the second schedule was wrapped up by the end of that month. an eco-friendly set is erected with 120 huts and houses in 27 acres of land.


== reception ==
gundello godari got positive reviews. the hindu gave a review stating "gundello godari is not a linear story of how these two protagonists battle the fury of nature. its a story of how they share their secrets, battle their inner demons, rise above their tumultuous past and discover love. the film is worth a watch. as a bonus, theres the maestros musical treat." the times of india gave a review stating "it's the story telling that stands out, and is bereft of the silly cliches that dominate tollywood potboilers. but if "masala" is your thing, you'll have to look elsewhere." deccan chronicle gave a review stating "in the midst of clichd potboilers and slapstick comedies, this period movie comes as a breath of fresh air and strikes a chord for its simplicity, rooted characters and raw emotions."indiaglitz gave a review stating "with tragedy piled up on inhumanity, gundello godari is a well-executed and ordinarily written film. watch it for the technical values, realistic characters and the simplicity writ that is write large." 123telugu.com gave a review stating "gundello godaari is a commendable effort from lakshmi manchu. the movie can be watched once for the superior technical effort that went into the film." idlebrain.com gave a review stating "gundello godari is a brave and sensible effort from lakshmi manchu. its a movie with raw emotions and realistic content."oneindia entertainment gave a review stating "gundello godari is a wonderful attempt by kumar nagendra. it has superb performances by lead actors and excellent production values. this romantic entertainer will certainly live up to the expectations that it had created prior its release." supergoodmovies gave a review stating "go and watch gundello godari. it is definitely worthy watch for this weekend."baradwaj rangan of the hindu wrote "for a while, maranthen mannithen looks like the kind of juicy melodrama that avm studios would have cranked out in an earlier age."


== box office ==
gundello godari opened to good response with an average of 75% to 90% occupancy on its opening day, running houseful at many places. the movie collected  5 crores in its opening weekend. at the end of the weekend, 25 additional screens were officially added after noticing the response.


== soundtrack ==
ilaiyaraaja composed the music for this film. on 18 october 2012, he flew down from chennai to attend the audio launch ceremony that was held at a specially erected village set at gandharva mahal in hyderabad. mohan babu felicitated the maestro on the occasion in the presence of other telugu composers m m keeravani and koti. lyrics in the film are penned by chandrabose, anantha sreeram, and r. ramu.telugu

tamil


== references ==


== external links ==
gundello godari at imdb