haasil is a 2003 indian crime drama film directed by tigmanshu dhulia. it stars jimmy sheirgill, hrishitaa bhatt, irrfan khan and ashutosh rana in lead roles. irrfan khan won the filmfare award for best actor in a negative role for his portrayal of ranvijay singh in the movie. the film is set and shot in and around allahabad, uttar pradesh. the movie has developed a cult following in the following years.


== plot ==
the background of the movie is student politics in the university of allahabad and the dirty turn it takes. when anirudh (jimmy sheirgill) meets niharika (hrishitaa bhatt) at university, they quickly become romantically involved. unfortunately, their relationship can't escape the political battles between two rival gangs of students headed by gaurishankar pandey (ashutosh rana) and ranvijay singh (irrfan khan). when anirudh meets ranvijay, who has eliminated gaurishankar pandey, the former believes that he is merely helping his fellow student.
anirudh gets involved in violent politics and shoots niharika's cousin accidentally. ranvijay singh helps him escape to mumbai with the help of his aide (rajpal yadav). anirudh later learns the truth of ranvijay singh whose ultimate aim is to marry niharika.
badrishankar pandey (murad ali), the brother of slain gaurishankar pandey, helps anirudh kill ranvijay in order to avenge the loss of his brother. a fierce gun battle takes place at the kumbh mela between the gangs of ranvijay and badrishankar pandey before anirudh kills ranvijay. the chief minister, kamalnath tiwari (sudhir pandey) helps them escape the crime scene and gets anirudh discharged from all the cases as he was also blackmailed by ranvijay.


== cast ==
jimmy sheirgill as anirudh 'ani' sharma
hrishita bhatt as niharika
irrfan khan as ranvijay singh
ashutosh rana as gauri shankar pandey
sudhir pandey as chief minister
varun badola as javed
tinu anand as mr. sharma (aniruddha's father)
sharat saxena as 	mr. singh (niharika's father)
brijendra kala as shugii (newspaper vendor)
rajpal yadav as chhutku
rajendranath zutshi as jackson
murad ali as badri shankar pandey
rajiv gupta as sp
navni parihar as niharika's mother
dadhi pandey as munna(ranvijay's gang member)
deepak kumar bandhu as taufik(ranvijay's gang member)
nissar khan as ranvijay's gang member
pankaj jha as gauri shankar's gang member


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack features 7 songs composed by jatin lalit, with lyrics from israr ansari, kausar pandey, vindo mahindra, satyaprakash and devmani pandey. the background score of the film was composed by abhishek ray.


== awards ==


=== 2004 filmfare awards ===
won  best actor in negative role  irrfan khan


== critical reception ==
kanchana suggu of rediff praised the acting performances of ashutosh rana, tinnu anand, jimmy shergill, hrishita bhatt and irrfan khan and said that, "haasil is powerful, honest, real; it makes you cringe in your seat." taran adarsh of bollywood hungama gave the film a rating of 2 out of 5 saying that, "though the film has several gripping moments and a power-packed performance by irfan khan, the outcome is hampered when the movie drifts into predictable zone, post-interval." shahid khan of planet bollywood praised the acting performances of all actors and gave the film a rating of 8 out of 10 saying that, "tigmanshu dhulia directs the film with great skill. it is admirable the way he handles the scenes of violence. they make you sit up and take notice."haasil was featured in avijit ghosh's book, 40 retakes: bollywood classics you may have missed.


== references ==


== external links ==
haasil at imdb
haasil at the ny times