half girlfriend is an indian hindi-language romantic drama film based on the novel of the same name written by chetan bhagat. the film is directed by mohit suri and stars arjun kapoor and shraddha kapoor in lead roles. the film also places vikrant massey and rhea chakraborty in important roles.
principal photography commenced in june 2016 and filming locations include delhi, mumbai, patna, dumraon, varanasi, new york city and cape town. the film was released worldwide on 19 may 2017.


== plot ==

madhav is a good basketball player who cannot speak english well. he gets accepted into university based on a sports quota where he meets riya somani, an upper-class young girl who is allowed temporary admission based on a sports quota. they become good friends and play basketball every evening on the college court. when madhav tells his roommate shailesh and friends about riya, they push him to ask riya out for a date, but she stops him and asks him just to be a friend. madhav's friends still encourage him to pursue riya in the hopes that she will eventually date him.
one day madhav and riya hang out at night. madhav picks her up from her house, and after spending the night, when she comes back home, she kisses madhav before entering her house.
when madhav attends riya's birthday, he questions her about the nature of their relationship. uncomfortable, riya says that she is not his girlfriend, but they can maybe reach a compromise since they have reached halfway, and she offers to be his "half girlfriend."
madhav's mother runs a school in their village where only boys study because of girls' absence of toilets. madhav learns that bill gates is coming to patna and will be funding grants to schools. madhav decides to apply for a grant, for which he goes to chanakya hotel in patna.
after the meeting, madhav meets riya, who was residing in the hotel and works for closeup. they meet and hang out for some time, where madhav comes to know that riya has divorced because her husband and his mother tried to beat her. as madhav needs to give a speech in english for bill gates, riya helps him prepare for it. one day, he takes her to his house, where madhav's mother asks her about her past- her marriage. she acts rudely with her upon knowing that she is a divorcee. a few days before the speech, when riya had to go back to patna, madhav's mother requests her to stay away from madhav. she, however, attends madhav's speech, where he is successful in getting a grant from the bill gates foundation. after the speech had ended, a small girl from the school hands a letter from riya for madhav. he learns from the letter that riya has been diagnosed with blood cancer and will die in three months. she requests him not to search for her as she herself does not know where she will go. in the present day, madhav is seen going to riya's house to deliver her belongings to her mother, who starts crying on learning about riya's disease. madhav recalls that she wanted to become a singer at a bar in new york. unprepared, madhav goes to new york to visit his friend shailesh.
shailesh and his wife rutvi learn about the whole incident and try to deviate madhav's attention from riya. rutvi tries to set him up with anshika, her friend. they spend some time together. madhav tries to find riya for three months continuously, and his time runs out. 
on the last day, when he was attending his farewell party, he saw a video where anshika, who had fallen in love with him, thanked him for being a part of his life. while she thanked him over a song while sitting at a bar, madhav sees a blurred picture of the singer who somewhat looked similar to riya, and the song was the same as the one which riya sang. desperate, he runs for the caf amidst falling snow and without any transport. upon reaching the caf, he requests the guard to allow him to enter. he enters the bar and finds out the singer is indeed riya. riya and madhav reconcile and consummate their relationship.
a few years later, madhav is seen talking to his mother about opening a new school, and riya helps their daughter learn to play basketball, who is unable to do it. riya tells her daughter never to give up.


== cast ==
arjun kapoor as madhav jha, a boy from bihar who hardly knows to speak english and ends up attracted towards riya somani.
shraddha kapoor as riya somani, a rich girl from delhi who comes from an entrepreneur background. a singer, she loves to enjoy her own company and sings at a bar in new york.
vikrant massey as shailesh, madhav's college mate who is protective of him.
rhea chakraborty as anshika, who loves madhav but lets him go for riya.
seema biswas as madhav's mother, who runs a school in bihar.
shree dhar dubey as hemant the estate agent.
anisa butt as rutvi, sailesh's wife
jiten lalwani as basketball coach
adam davenport as bar owner in new york city, usa
dalip sondhi as mr. somani/riya's father
sujata sehgal as mrs. somani/riya's mother
tvisha shah as tvisha jha/daughter of riya and madhav
kashvi kothari as shabnam/a village girl
vikas b mandaliya as rohan chandak/riya's husbandadditionally, a digitally superimposed likeness of bill gates appears in the movie in scenes where he comes to visit madhav's village in bihar.


== production ==
the film went into production in march 2016. prominent shooting locations included st. stephen's college in new delhi and times square and the un headquarters in new york city. it is the first bollywood movie to be shot at the un headquarters. the basketball action in the film is by rob miller, nba and the reelsports team. around 200 students from different colleges were roped in to play extras as some of the scenes demand delhi university students in the film. the trailer was released on 10 april.


== box office ==
the film was released on 20 may 2017 worldwide. the film collected 120 million on its opening day and  104 million on second day. on its first weekend, the total collection was noted as 320 million. on its second weekend, the total collection of the film stood at 540 million. its lifetime worldwide gross is estimated to be 8690 crore, with 7277 crore earned domestically and 1314 crore outside india.


== soundtrack ==


== awards and nominations ==


== references ==


== external links ==
half girlfriend at imdb
half girlfriend at bollywood hungama