halla bol (raise your voice) is an indian hindi-language drama film directed by rajkumar santoshi. halla bol stars ajay devgn and vidya balan in pivotal roles and a number of celebrities from the hindi and other film industries appear as themselves. produced by samee siddiqui, the film's score and soundtrack was composed by sukhwinder singh, while nataraja subramanian and steven bernard were the cinematographer and editor respectively. it was released on 11 january 2008.
the film touches upon the jessica lall murder case, aamir khan's involvement with the narmada bachao andolan, the right to information act, and public participation in fighting corruption. it also references the theatre group jan natya manch, whose leader, theatre activist safdar hashmi, was killed by political rivals while performing a street play by the same name, halla bol!, in 1989.


== plot ==
ashfaque (ajay devgn) is a small town boy aspiring to be a film star in the hindi film industry. he joins a street theatre group run by a reformed dacoit sidhu (pankaj kapur), who uses street theatre as a medium to bring about an awakening in the masses. ashfaque struggles to give a creative vent to the actor in him in order to realise his dreams. ashfaque's determined struggle pays off and he gets a break in films. he gets a new screen name  sameer khan. he moves up the success ladder in a very short time.
soon, he becomes sameer khan the superstar. amidst all the adulation and applause, he slowly loses his own identity. he forgets his real self and imbibes all characteristics of the various roles played by him on screen. corruption overtakes his entire system, alienating him from all loved ones, including his wife sneha (vidya balan).


== cast ==
ajay devgn as ashfaaq khan / sameer
vidya balan as sneha
rahul kanawat as ranveer
pankaj kapur as sidhu
darshan jariwala as ganpatrao gaekwad
sanjai mishra as sameer's manager
abhay bhargava
anupam shyam
aanjjan srivastav as amanullah khan
sulbha arya as nazma khan
iqbal dosani as a police commissioner
deepak pandit as police inspector rathod
arun behll as a reporter
sitaram panchal
rushita singh
mukesh tiwari


=== special appearances ===
prabhu chawla as himself
lekh tandon as himself
tusshar kapoor as himself
sana khan as herself
jackie shroff as himself
ruby bhatia as herself
sayali bhagat in the song "is pal ki soch"
pahlaj nihalani as himself
kareena kapoor as herself
neeraj vora as himself
amjad sabri as himself at dargahspecial appearances at the award ceremony (in order of appearance):


== casting ==
priyanka chopra was the original choice for the lead actress role. however, she opted out of the film to work on another film that too was to be directed by raj kumar santoshi, london dreams (2009) although she was replaced by asin thottumkal in that film. raj kumar santhoshi left that film and priyanka chopra was removed from london dreams on salman khan's demands.


== soundtrack ==
the film's music was composed by singer and composer sukhwinder singh.

"jab tak hai dum"  sukhwinder singh
"shabad gurbani"  sukhwinder singh
"is pal ki soch"  harshdeep kaur
"more haji piya"  amjad farid sabri
"barsan lagi"  sneha pant
"halla bol theme" - instrumental


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
halla bol at imdb 
halla bol at bollywood hungama