happy ending is a 2014 indian hindi-language romantic comedy film directed by raj nidimoru and krishna d.k. the film is produced by illuminati films and stars saif ali khan, ileana d'cruz and govinda in the lead roles. the theatrical trailer launched on 10 october 2014.


== plot ==
writer yudi (saif ali khan) wrote a hit book five and a half years ago but he is still living life king-size in los angeles, enjoying fame and affairs, avoiding commitment, doing no work, partying with his miserably married friend montu (ranvir shorey) or having conversations with his fat, bearded inner voice brother yogi (also saif). suddenly, yudi's money runs out and his publishers dump him for hit romance novelist aanchal (ileana d'cruz), visiting from mumbai.
the only work yudi now gets is from bollywood single-screen superstar armaan (govinda) who insists he copies hollywood movies and writes a multiplex-style romedy (romance & comedy). meanwhile, yudi's dentist and once-girlfriend vishakha (kalki koechlin) is pursuing him obsessively, even loading videos of him singing in the shower on her laptop, forcing yudi and montu to break into her home when she's away. on top of this, yudi's got severe writer's block, stopping him from finishing any work.
running away from it all, yudi tries to charm aanchal but she's commitment-averse too. however, she gradually warms up to him, escorting him to armaan's party, trying to help yudi write, even agreeing to take a road trip with him to her book reading in san francisco.
eventually reaching san francisco, the couple is forced to share a hotel room  and agreeing to keep it simple and commitment-free, they end up making love. their relationship grows funnier  on aanchal's last night in la, they argue over dinner, yudi throws her phone into a vase while she douses him with water  but neither expresses anything more than a sense of light fun. it's only when yudi's ex divya (priety zinta in a cameo), having argued with her husband and visiting yudi with her kids, tells him he loves aanchal that he admits it to himself.
yudi then races aanchal's taxi to the airport in a hilarious scene and tells her his feelings, but she expresses her wish to remain friends with him. as she leaves, yudi is sunk in depression, and then starts to write. along the way, vishakha gets engaged to a panic-stricken yudi by falsely claiming she's pregnant  but then breaks it up, saying she doesn't want him to marry her out of pity.
armaan, who has meanwhile got himself cosmetic surgery and six-pack abs in la, is impressed with the 'kick-ass' script yudi presents him. however, for the script's ending, yudi goes to mumbai and sees aanchal where he tells her they can take it one day at a time  and perhaps live their whole lives together like that. aanchal smiles and the happy ending begins.


== cast ==
saif ali khan as yudi jaitely/yogi
ileana d'cruz as aanchal reddy
kalki koechlin as vishakha
ranvir shorey as montu
govinda as armaan
kareena kapoor khan as yudi's girlfriend (in a cameo)
preity zinta as divya (in a cameo)
rahul nath as gary
shivani tanksale as gauri


== production ==
the film was produced by illuminati films. some parts of the film were shot in ann arbor, michigan.saif ali khan makes a guest appearance in his own movie. yudi is the leading character and he plays yogi in the cameo.
ileana d'cruz's boyfriend andrew kneebone is making a guest appearance although he is not an actor.kareena kapoor khan and preity zinta also make guest appearances in the film.


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film is composed by the duo sachin - jigar while lyrics are penned by amitabh bhattacharya, priya saraiya and ashish pandit. the song "paaji tussi such a pussy cat" was released as a single prior to the audio launch of the movie. the song jaise mera tu is copied from the song "meher meher" from the telugu movie d for dopidi which was produced by the director duo raj and d.k.


== references ==


== external links ==
happy ending at imdb 
happy ending at bollywood hungama