archie harrison mountbatten-windsor (born 6 may 2019) is the son of prince harry, duke of sussex, and meghan, duchess of sussex. he is seventh in the line of succession to the british throne.


== early life and family ==
archie harrison mountbatten-windsor was born to the duke and duchess of sussex at 05:26 bst (04:26 utc) on 6 may 2019 at the portland hospital in london. several landmarks were illuminated in different colours to mark the birth, including niagara falls, the cn tower and the london eye. his name was announced on 8 may 2019. he was christened wearing the royal christening gown by justin welby, archbishop of canterbury, on 6 july 2019 in the private chapel at windsor castle, with water from the river jordan.mountbatten-windsor descends paternally from the british royal family. he has mixed-race ancestry maternally, having african-american and european-american lineage. in the 2021 television interview oprah with meghan and harry, the duchess of sussex said that a member of the royal family was concerned "about how dark [archie's] skin might be when he's born".  in early 2020, mountbatten-windsor's parents stepped down from their roles as working members of the royal family. the family then moved to north america, and have resided in montecito, california, since that summer. mountbatten-windsor has dual nationality of the united kingdom and the united states.


== title and succession ==
as a great-grandchild of queen elizabeth ii, mountbatten-windsor is seventh in the line of succession to the british throne. as heir apparent to his father's dukedom of sussex, earldom of dumbarton, and barony of kilkeel, he is customarily entitled to use prince harry's senior subsidiary title earl of dumbarton as a courtesy. however, the duke and duchess decided instead that he would be styled as master archie harrison mountbatten-windsor in accordance with their wish that he grow up as a private citizen.under letters patent issued by king george v in 1917, mountbatten-windsor is entitled to become a prince upon the accession of his grandfather, charles, prince of wales. in the interview oprah with meghan and harry, the duchess of sussex said that she had been told that changes would be made to remove that entitlement as part of charles's reported plans for a slimmed-down monarchy. she suggested that this was because her son is mixed-race.


== references ==


== external links ==
archie mountbatten-windsor at the royal family website