hasee toh phasee (transl.smile and get snared) is a 2014 indian hindi-language romantic comedy-drama film directed by vinil mathew and produced by karan johar and anurag kashyap. the film features sidharth malhotra, parineeti chopra and adah sharma in the lead roles. the film was released on 7 february 2014 and collected around 620 million (us$8.7 million) worldwide.


== plot ==
nikhil (sidharth malhotra) is a struggling businessman who thinks he loves karishma (adah sharma), an actress. nikhil is characterized as a person who believes that once committed to a girl, there should be no straying. karishma asks nikhil to arrange 50 million (us$700,000) before marriage, which is seven days later, to earn a contract.
nikhil meets meeta (parineeti chopra), karishma's younger sister, whom he had a brief encounter with seven years ago. meeta, an iitian in chemical engineering and phd., is a super-intelligent geek with unusual habits and tics, who ran away seven years ago to china after stealing money from her father (manoj joshi), leading to his heart attack. now, just a week before nikhil and karishma's wedding, meeta has turned up to meet her father, but karishma is scared that her sister's sudden appearance might ruin their marriage. hence, karishma assigns nikhil to keep meeta away from her father.
meeta has returned, intending to steal again, but her involvement with nikhil during the next seven days diverts her attention. during these seven days, with many personal and social activities, nikhil and meeta fall in love, but nikhil backs off as he doesn't want to betray karishma. he comes to know that for her research, meeta has taken a hefty loan of 100 million (us$1.4 million) from a chinese investor by forging her father's signature. the deadline for payback is over, and an extension of three days was given, during which she has to steal money from her father's account to save him from the investor's goons. nikhil helps meeta to hack her father's account but advises her to apologize to her family. meeta reunites with her family, and nikhil realizes he is marrying the wrong girl.
meeta cannot gather the courage to steal her father's money and tells her father the truth. her father forgives her and provides her with the money. nikhil later tells meeta on the phone that he should have gone with her to goa when she asked him to come with her seven years ago. meeta tells him that it is not too late for them to run away.
when nikhil comes to meeta's and sees karishma happy and joyful with her sibling, he returns home, realizing the complications and they he cannot hurt karishma. nikhil scolds meeta for being selfish and only thinking of her benefit and tells her to go away from here. mr. adlani calls nikhil showing his interest in nikhil's idea.
on the wedding day, meeta leaves her house without informing anyone, leaving her mobile phone in karishma's room. nikhil tries to call her and sends many texts, which go unanswered. on reaching the mandap, meeta's father informs him that she has left for china. karishma finds meeta's phone in her room, reads the messages, and realizes she has lost nikhil. during the wedding, she asks nikhil to leave, and her father supports her decision. meeta cries at the airport and tries to end her life but gives up and goes back to the wedding. she and nikhil reunite and express their love for each other, sealing it with a kiss.
the movie ends with nikhil and meeta at the airport, scheduled to travel to germany. meeta tells him that there is another problem waiting for them.


== cast ==
sidharth malhotra as nikhil bharadwaj
parineeti chopra as dr. meeta solanki/meeta nikhil bharadwaj
adah sharma as karishma solanki
manoj joshi as devesh solanki, meeta and karishma's father
sharat saxena as s.b bharadwaj,  nikhil's father
neena kulkarni as nikhil's mother
samir sharma as nikhil's brother
anil mange as abhinandan
sameer khakhar as alpesh bhai solanki
sunil upadhyay as salim
garvita sharma as amrita
gulzar dastur as nikhils aunt
lily patel as baa, meeta's grandmother
akash dabas as nikhils friend
karan johar in a special appearance
tinnu anand as mukesh adnani (special appearance)
jaymeet sinha as ruhaan
bobby darling in the song "drama queen"
namit shah as young nikhil


== production ==


=== development ===
karan johar's production house dharma productions financed this film along with phantom productions, which is run by four filmmakers - anurag kashyap, vikramaditya motwane, vikas bahl and madhu mantena.


=== casting ===
anurag kashyap, who is very excited about this project, said, "the story works with fresh faces, but requires a high level of chemistry and maturity in the performances. after spending months shortlisting various actors, we finalised sidharth and parineeti." reportedly, adah sharma is playing the second female lead in the movie and the sister of the film's female protagonist. to capture the seven-year period covered in the film, vinil matthew wanted parineeti chopra to have different hairstyles.


=== filming ===
filming began on 18 april 2013. on talking about the director vinil mathew, sidharth malhotra, who would be cast as a middle class working man in the film, said, "it didn't feel like the first day of shoot because he is so sorted and knows exactly what he wants. he made us rehearse a lot during a two-month workshop before shooting began". in an interview sidharth says, he plays a character who is stressed out, lost and sentimental. he meets a girl who is a bit cracked. actress parineeti chopra reported that her character was a quite difficult one. it is the first collaboration for both the protagonists with each other, but however, none complained and instead, both were praising each other to be energetic and tireless. the fact that actress adah sharma was also involved in the cast as one of the lead characters was supposed to be kept a secret as the producers wanted to make an official announcement about it. but it was later revealed as adah was seen shooting for the film at the bandra bandstand promenade.


== soundtrack ==
shankar-ehsaan-loy were initially signed on as composers for the film. but eventually they opted out, and songs featured in the film were composed by vishal-shekhar, while the lyrics are written by amitabh bhattacharya and kumaar. the first single "drama queen", sung by shreya ghoshal and vishal dadlani, was launched on 23 december 2013. the song "zehnaseeb", sung by chinmayi along with shekhar ravjiani, was launched on 3 january 2014. there are six original tracks and a remix track in the album. the complete soundtrack album was released on 6 january 2014. the remix version of "drama queen" was later uploaded as a single on the official youtube channel of dharma productions. a gujarati rap song was entirely written and composed by khamosh shah, which is there in the film but not on the soundtrack. the 'punjabi wedding song' was choreographed by karishma chavan. 


=== track listing ===
all lyrics are written by amitabh bhattacharya, except the song "ishq bulaava" was written by kumaar; all music is composed by vishalshekhar.


=== reception ===
rediff gave it 3.5/5 stars and stated, "the music of hasee toh phasee delivers more than it promised at the outset. one expected just a fun-filled score, but vishal-shekhar have gone beyond that to bring us some soulful melodies as well." koimoi giving the same ratings added, "if you can't applaud this music album for technique and creativity, sheer freshness will do the trick for you. from a peppy wedding song to the calming manchala, music-director duo vishal and shekhar strike the right chords. moreover, lyrics by kumaar and amitabh bhattacharya add the right ingredients to make the scores of hasee toh phasee worth listening to more than a single time.". 


== critical reception ==
meena iyer of times of india gave it 4/5 stars, stating, "hasee toh phasee is for the romantics who like their martinis stirred not shaken. this romantic comedy mirrors the quirks in human nature subtly and provides humour in everyday situations; in the family and amongst friends. if you're looking to rediscover the magic of goofy love around valentines, give htp a shot."
taran adarsh of bollywood hungama gave it 3.5/5 stars and said, "hasee toh phasee dares to be distinctive. this one's *not* merely about opposites falling in love. this one's a quirky love tale involving two individuals, shades different from the mundane stuff on matters of heart".
sukanya verma of rediff gave the movie with same ratings and wrote, "hasee toh phasee is that rare film that allows you to know the two people you're investing in. and the closer you get, the more they win you over. parineeti sinks her teeth into this misunderstood kook without a trace of self-consciousness or exaggeration. if that's not magical enough, what hasee toh phasee celebrates certainly is. that the only high you need is life, love and smiles."
mohar basu of koimoi gave it 3/5 stars and wrote, "the film is both pleasantly surprising and utterly baffling in equal amounts. though vinil mathew's direction might not be perfect due to his lack of experience, hasee toh phasee will definitely win your heart for the symbiotically arranged, pitch perfect chemistry of parineeti chopra and sidharth malhotra. it was passionate and compelling, almost to make me wish that they were a real life couple and that alone becomes the winning shot."
a review from india today rated it with 3/5 stars, stating, "hasee toh phasee is a refreshing, much-needed entry in the contemporary romcom genre, which has lately seen a series of uninspiring films. it's largely to do with the presence of an unseen pairing with great chemistry - chopra and sidharth malhotra - and mathew and writer harshvardhan kulkarni's perky take on love."tushar joshi of daily news and analysis gave the movie with 3/5 stars, writing, "the lead pair of sidharth and parineeti make hasee toh phasee enjoyable and believable. this odd pairing works only because these two actors take an effort to play their characters with utmost sincerity. watch it if you want to see a different take on modern day romance. hasee toh phasee is worth a watch for a solid act put together by its lead pair.".


== box office ==


=== india ===
according to box office india, hasee toh phasee had a reasonable start in major metros in most parts of the country. hasee toh phasee grossed around 40 million (us$560,000) on its first day. the movie showed a 35% growth on saturday, earning about 55 million (us$770,000). the weekend collections (according to box office india) were approximately 170 million (us$2.4 million), while trade analyst taran adarsh claimed it to be 185 million (us$2.6 million). the movie grossed a decent 275 million (us$3.9 million) in the first week. in the second week, the movie's screen count fell due to the release of yash raj films' gunday. however, it still grossed a figure of 47.5 million (us$670,000), taking the 10-day total to 320 million (us$4.5 million).


=== overseas ===
the opening weekend gross of film was approx $1.027 million ( 64.1 million).


== awards and nominations ==


== see also ==
bollywood films of 2014


== references ==


== external links ==
hasee toh phasee at imdb