haseena maan jaayegi (transl.the beauty will agree) is a 1999 indian hindi-language comedy film directed by david dhawan. it stars sanjay dutt, govinda, karisma kapoor and pooja batra, with anupam kher, kader khan, aruna irani, and paresh rawal in supporting. the film is inspired by the 1966 film pyar kiye jaa and went on to become the fifth-highest-grossing hindi film of 1999. it is often regarded as being amongst govinda's greatest performances and he won many awards for his role as monu. pyar kiye ja itself is a remake of the 1964 tamil classic film kadhalikka neramillai which had been remade as the telugu film preminchi choodu (1965), the hindi film pyar kiye jaa (1966), and the kannada film preethi madu thamashe nodu (1979).


== plot ==
amirchand (kader khan) is the ill-fated father of two mischievous sonssonu (sanjay dutt) and monu (govinda). both of them are always up to one prank or another, most of them aimed at stealing money from amirchand.
in the opening scene, they call up their father, acting like gangsters, and ask for a huge sum if he wants to live. the plan fails as amirchand turns out to be the driver of the taxi in which they were escaping. later, they fix up the marriage of their father
with shakuntala (bindu) and take one lakh rupees as advance dowry from her brother jamnadas (asrani). this plan also fails as amirchand refuses to entertain jamnadas and his sister.
amirchand warns their sons to become serious towards life if they want to live in his home. he asks monu to join office and sonu to go to goa for claiming some money he had lent to someone. whereas monu plays another prank by calling up a girls' hostel and flirting with ritu (karisma kapoor), sonu mistakenly goes to one gulzarilal verma (anupam kher) for claiming the money, where he meets pooja (pooja batra). both ritu and pooja are gulzarilal's daughters.
sonu and monu fall in love with pooja and ritu, respectively. sonu calls up monu to come to goa, disguised as his uncle for fixing up his and pooja's marriage. this leads to a series of confusions as gulzarilal's sister santho (aruna irani) also falls in love with monu (disguised as uncle).
to get rid of the problem, sonu and monu throw a dummy of the uncle from top of a cliff, only to land up getting arrested for killing the non-existent uncle. amirchand comes to know of this and reaches goa with his assistant kunj bihari (satish kaushik). in favour of the story's and sonu and mon's fate, amirchand and gulzarilal turn out to be long lost friends. together they set out towards the nearest police station when they get kidnapped by a bhai (ashish vidyarthi). sonu and monu escape from the lockup with bhootnath's (paresh rawal) help and rescue their father and to-be father-in-law, thus proving to be worthy sons.


== cast ==
sanjay dutt  sonu
govinda  monu, rai bahadur aka chachaji
karisma kapoor  ritu verma
pooja batra  pooja verma
kader khan  amirchand
paresh rawal  bhootnath
satish kaushik  kunj bihari
aruna irani  santho/santosh verma
anupam kher  gulzarilal verma
ashish vidyarthi  bhai (gangster)
aasif sheikh  pritam nath
razak khan  bhai's henchman
mohan joshi  prem nath
pushpa verma  premnath's wife
bindu  shakuntala, guest appearance
asrani  jamnadas, guest appearance
shakti kapoor  himself
anil dhawan  police commissioner
mahavir shah  goa police inspector


== soundtrack ==

all lyrics are written by suraj, sameer, nitin raikwar; all music is composed by anu malik.


== trivia ==
in the beginning of the film, sonu and monu are in a restaurant and don't have money to pay the bill. monu picks the pocket of shakti kapoor for his wallet and then tries to keep it back but his hand gets stuck. this scene is taken from the return of mr. bean, an episode from the mr. bean television series. this scene is repeated in the movie dhamaal.
the lead actress karisma kapoor's mother, babita, and great uncle, shashi kapoor, also starred in a movie of the same name.


== see also ==
list of indian comedy films


== references ==


== external links ==
haseena maan jaayegi at imdb