hawaa hawaai  is a 2014 indian film directed by amole gupte. the film features partho gupte and saqib saleem. the film is produced by fox star studios. saqib saleem played role of a skating coach in the film. the director amol gupte composed and sang one song for the movie. rest of the songs were composed by hitesh sonik. amol gole again worked with gupte and shot this movie. the film released in theatres on 9 may 2014 with good reviews.


== plot ==
the plot centres around arjun harishchand waghmare (partho gupte) and his dream to skate. the film chronicles his coach aniket bhargava
(saqib saleem) and arjun's journey towards being a champion skater. 
after his father's death, arjun and his family move to mumbai. arjun starts to work at a tea stall where he sees some children arrive at night for lucky (aniket) sir. he sees that the children are skating and gets attracted to skating. he finds the skates too expensive so his four friends make a pair of skates out of garbage and call it hawaa hawaai. aniket gets impressed by arjun and decides to teach him skating. arjun comes out to be very talented and aniket decides to send him to participate in the district-level skating race. on the day of the race, arjun gets missing. aniket finds that he is ill and immediately takes him to a hospital where he comes to know that arjun has hepatitis. arjun gets cured and aniket learns about the difficulties of the poor child about the lack of proper food, sleep, and continuous workload. he realizes that arjun and his friends have a big heart and they need to be educated. he tries to help them. all his other students come to meet arjun and bring him nutritional supplements. aniket decides to send arjun to the state-level skating race and registers him from his hometown (yavatmal district). arjun remembers of his father and wins the race. the film ends showing that arjun and his friends are admitted in a school and an article is printed in the newspaper about arjun.


== cast ==
partho gupte as arjun harishchand waghmare
saqib saleem as aniket bhargava / lucky sir
pragya yadav as pragya nanda
makarand deshpande as harishchand waghmare (arjun's father)
devraya gole
anuj sachdeva as aniruddha bhargava (aniket's elder brother)
razak khan as garage mechanic
neha joshi
rekha kamat
sanjay dadich
sanjay tripathi
dhiraj utmani as lucky sir's skating coach
hardik raheja
srishti sharma
arjun nichani
manav hirey
zufin
saba qureshi
aaliya qureshi
solya qureshi
suman arjun mahaskar
thirupathi n. kushnapelli
salman chhote khan
ashfaque bismillah khan
maaman memon
mahesh kumar
jaival shah
khushi shah
sunidhi chauhan (special appearance)
riyansh bhatia


== production ==
as of 27 august 2013, shooting of the film began in mumbai.


== critical reception ==
hawaa hawaai got mostly positive reviews from critics. subhash k. jha gave it 4.5 stars and said that "hawaa hawaai is an extraordinary saga of ordinary lives, the kind we often pass by at traffic signals". joginder tuteja called it a "touching tale" and rated it 3.5 stars. noyon jyoti parasara rated it 4 out of 4 and commented "the film serves as a reminder and a lesson - in hope, in empathy and gratitude.".


== references ==


== external links ==
hawaa hawaai at imdb
hawaa hawaai on facebook
hawaa hawaai on twitter