hawa (english: wind) is a 2003 hindi horror film starring tabu. the film was an unofficial remake of the 1983 american horror film the entity which starred barbara hershey. hawa was later dubbed into telugu as naa intlo oka roju and then in tamil as raja leelai.


== plot ==
the beautiful sanjana is a divorcee who moves to a hillside house as she cannot afford a house in the city. she runs her step father's antique shop. however, it's not long before strange occurrences begin near and in her home. one day a tibetian old lady gives her an antique locket at her antique shop and leaves. sanjana sells that to a tourist couple for rs.500. sanjana finds the lady on the way to her home to return the money but she discovers that the lady was dead. the locket was returned to sanjana by the tourist as the tibetian lady keeps haunting the couple to return it back. sanjana is mentally tortured and physically raped by an invisible demon. her dog is also possessed and attacks her and vicky, her younger brother. sanjana consults a psychiatrist who brings a parasychologist. sanjana comes to learn that her the demon comes from an old well, where tribals used to push and kill criminals as punishment. due to lightning striking the well, one soul escapes and haunts sanjana. the daemon also takes her younger daughter. the parasychologist opens the well from where all the evil spirits comes out and attacks him.
sanjana jumps into the well to bring back her daughter. there the all the spirits gets combined into a huge daemon. sanjana throws the tibetian locket to hit the daemon which then dissolves. the soul of sanjana's father comes as an angel and returns her younger daughter.
sanjana prepares to leave her house and suddenly the door closes. a deamonic voice calls her. sanjana opens the door but nothing she finds. before leaving her younger daughter suddenly runs to the house and the door closes.


== cast ==
tabu as sanjana
shahbaz khan as dr. asif ali
mukesh tiwari as psychiatrist-exorcist (tantrik)
imran khan (tv actor) as sanjana's brother, vicky
grusha kapoor as pooja (as grusha grover)
vishwajeet pradhan as pooja's husband
amit behl as sanjana's husband, vijay
avtar gill as sanjana's father/ angel
hansika motwani as sasha, sanjana's daughter
baby bhavika as misha
suresh chatwal as real estate agent


== soundtrack ==


== critical reception ==
taran adarsh of bollywood hungama gave the film 2.5 stars and claimed that 'the film merges two lethal aspects, sex and violence, which should prove a path-breaking exercise for the hindi viewer.'
suraj das of planet bollywood, gave the film 2 stars out of 5 and said that 'self-respecting moviegoers looking for quality film rather than shameful sexual exploitation should steer far clear of this compost.'
anjum n from rediff, gave the film a negative review and said that 'tabu is the only saving grace of the movie', and 'it's rather sad that all her effort has been wasted in a movie like hawa.


== external links ==
hawa at imdb