he got game is a 1998 american sports drama film written, produced and directed by spike lee and starring denzel washington and ray allen. the film revolves around jake shuttlesworth (denzel washington), father of the top-ranked basketball prospect in the country, jesus shuttlesworth (ray allen). jake, in prison for killing his wife, is released on parole for a week by the state's governor to persuade his son to play for the governor's alma mater in exchange for a reduced prison sentence.


== plot ==
jesus shuttlesworth (ray allen), the top high school basketball player in the united states, is being pursued by the top college basketball programs in the nation. his father, jake, is a convicted felon serving time at attica correctional facility for accidentally killing his wife, martha, (jesus' mother) six years earlier. jake is temporarily released by the governor, an influential alumnus of "big state," one of the colleges jesus is considering, so that he might persuade his son to sign with the governor's college. if successful, he'll get an early release from prison.
upon his first moments outside of prison, jake contacts his daughter, mary shuttlesworth (zelda harris), who is happy to see him. when jesus returns home from school, he refuses to look his father in the eye, and tells his sister to get rid of the "stranger" in their living room. jesus later agrees to meet with his father at an alternative location away from mary. throughout the movie, jake tries to persuade jesus to attend big state with seemingly no success. eventually, he divulges the deal set up by the governor. however, jesus appears to be unsympathetic to his father's situation.
flashbacks illustrate the younger jesus' grueling basketball training under his father, and the night an argument between jake and jesus escalated into violence, resulting in jake accidentally killing jesus' mother after she intervened.
intertwined with the story of the shuttlesworth family is the sub-plot of dakota barns (milla jovovich), a prostitute who stays in the room next to jake in the run-down hotel, which the warden has booked for him. dakota is being abused by her procurer and companion, sweetness, which jake overhears through the thin walls. throughout the film, jake is seen helping dakota by cleaning her wounds and giving her some of his money to be used for his expenses during his week out of prison. he also develops a romantic relationship with her. dakota is seen in one of the final scenes of the movie taking a greyhound bus away from new york city.
jesus is tempted with offers of cash and women on recruiting visits to big-time basketball programs. he also considers entering the nba in order to play professionally sooner and immediately lift himself and his sister out of poverty. jake finally challenges jesus to a game of one-on-one basketball. if jake wins, jesus will sign a letter of intent to play for big state and if jesus wins, he can make his own decision. after a competitive start, jake tires during the course of the game and jesus wins. as jake is collected for transportation back to attica, he turns to jesus and says, "let me tell you something, son: you get that hatred out your heart, or you'll end up just another nigga ... like your father."
ultimately, jesus decides to sign to play for big state and gives jake his blessing. however, the governor does not give jake the promised reduction, as jesus did not sign the letter of intent, and jake's work-release is fabricated in the media as an escape from prison before being recaptured. jake ultimately finds freedom by casting away his dreams and burdens to his son, jesus, symbolized by the throwing of his old basketball over the prison wall and magically onto the big state court where jesus is practicing alone.  jesus clutches the ball, knowing it is a message of hope from his father.


== cast ==


== production ==
filming took place between july and september 1997. locations included coney island, brooklyn, cabrinigreen housing projects in chicago, illinois, elon university, charlotte, north carolina, and los angeles, california.
for the role of jesus, lee had drawn up a list of every nba player who could pass for a high school senior. kobe bryant was the original choice to portray jesus shuttlesworth, but after shooting several air balls that resulted in a brutal playoff loss to the utah jazz in the 1997 nba playoffs, he planned an extensive workout plan that would help maintain his strength throughout the duration of the longer nba seasons. lee found tracy mcgrady too reserved and was not impressed by allen iverson's performance. management for kevin garnett and stephon marbury wanted a guarantee that one or the other would be offered the part. travis best, walter mccarty, and rick fox also auditioned, and lee cast them in supporting roles.  lee approached allen during halftime of a bucks-knicks game, ultimately offering him the role of jesus. allen had never acted before, and he trained with an acting coach for eight weeks prior to filming.nba players shaquille o'neal, reggie miller, bill walton, scottie pippen, michael jordan, and charles barkley, syracuse university coach jim boeheim, nba coaches rick pitino and george karl and broadcaster dick vitale made cameo appearances at one point early in the film.
former football legend jim brown also appears as one of jake's parole officers, assigned to keep tabs on him while he's away from the prison.


== release ==


=== box office ===
he got game was produced on an estimated $25 million budget. in the opening weekend of its release, it was shown on 1,319 screens, and took in $7,610,663 at the u.s. box offices debuting at #1. it eventually grossed a total of $21,554,585.00, which was a box office flop considering it fell short of its $25 million budget.


=== critical response ===
on review aggregator rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 81% based on 63 reviews, with an average rating of 6.87/10. the website's critics consensus reads: "though not without its flaws, he got game finds spike lee near the top of his game, combining trenchant commentary with his signature visuals and a strong performance from denzel washington." at metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 64 out of 100, based on 21 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "b+" on an a+ to f scale.time out london writing, "most scenes play too long, with a surplus of ideas, textures, tones and characters, and after 134 minutes it's clear lee's problem with closure hasn't gone away."  roger ebert gave the film three-and-a-half-stars, and called it lee's best film since malcolm x. he was particularly encouraged by lee's determination not to adhere to typical conventions.both ray allen and washington drew praise for their performances, with roger ebert writing that allen "is that rarity, an athlete who can act," and slate magazine writing that washington's performance was "gorgeously underplayed".espn's review pointed out factual flaws in the story: "...coaches aren't allowed to discuss potential recruits until after the signing period. come on, spike. (and while we're at it, players aren't allowed to visit a college one week before the signing deadline; jesus couldn't live alone with his sister without both of them being thrown in a foster home; and there's no way in hell that jesus wouldn't have just turned pro if he was that good and that broke.)"


== soundtrack ==

the soundtrack for he got game was composed of numerous orchestral pieces by aaron copland with songs created by public enemy. it was released by def jam on april 21, 1998.


== awards and nominations ==
1999 acapulco black film festivalbest actor  denzel washington (nominated)
best director  spike lee (nominated)
best screenplay  spike lee (nominated)
best film (nominated)
best soundtrack (nominated)1999 naacp image awardsoutstanding lead actor in a motion picture  denzel washington (nominated)
outstanding youth actor/actress  zelda harris (nominated)
outstanding motion picture (nominated)1999 mtv movie awardsmtv movie award best breakthrough male performance  ray allen (nominated)1998 stinkers bad movie awardsworst sense of direction  spike lee (nominated)


== references ==


== external links ==
he got game at imdb
he got game at allmovie
he got game at box office mojo
he got game at rotten tomatoes