here come the huggetts is a 1948 british comedy film, the first of the huggetts series, about a working class english family. all three films in the series were directed by ken annakin and released by gainsborough pictures.jack warner and kathleen harrison head the cast as factory worker joe huggett and his wife ethel, with petula clark, jane hylton and susan shaw as their young daughters (all with the same first names as the actresses portraying them) and amy veness as their opinionated grandmother. diana dors had an early role.joe and ethel had been introduced a year earlier in the film holiday camp and there would be two sequels, vote for huggett and the huggetts abroad (both 1949).


== plot ==
factory worker joe huggett has a first-time telephone installed at home, for work purposes, but his daughters quickly find a lot more use for it. diana, a flighty cousin of ethel's (played by a 16-year-old diana dors), arrives for a not-very-welcome visit and causes problems at home and at joe's workplace when ethel persuades joe to get her a job there. eldest daughter jane must choose between her fianc who has been away in the forces and a new local admirer. meanwhile, the family is planning to go to london to see the royal wedding, and grandma huggett joins them in camping out overnight near buckingham palace.
clark, who began her career as a child vocalist on bbc radio, sings the song "walking backwards".


== cast ==
jack warner as joe huggett
kathleen harrison as ethel huggett
jane hylton as jane huggett
susan shaw as susan huggett
petula clark as pet huggett
jimmy hanley as jimmy gardner
david tomlinson as harold hinchley
diana dors as diana hopkins
peter hammond as peter hawtrey
john blythe as gowan
amy veness as grandma huggett
clive morton as mr. campbell
maurice denham as 1st engineer
doris hare as mrs. fisher
esma cannon as youth leader
alison leggatt as 	miss perks
dandy nichols as	aunt edie
hal osmond as 2nd engineer
peter scott as office boy
keith shepherd as vicar
edmundo ros as himself (as edmundo ros and his rhumba band)


== production ==
filming took place in june 1948. the working title was wedding bells.film reviewer stephen vagg described the film as a breakthrough role for diana dors, who played ma huggett's niece.


== references ==


== external links ==
here come the huggetts at imdb
here come the huggetts at bfi
review of film at variety