mamma mia! here we go again is a 2018 jukebox musical romantic comedy film written and directed by ol parker, from a story by parker, catherine johnson, and richard curtis. it is a follow-up to the 2008 film mamma mia!, which in turn is based on the west end/broadway musical of the same name using the music of abba. the film features an ensemble cast, including dominic cooper, amanda seyfried, pierce brosnan, colin firth, stellan skarsgrd, jeremy irvine, josh dylan, hugh skinner, lily james, jessica keenan wynn, alexa davies, christine baranski, julie walters, andy garca, meryl streep, and cher. both a prequel and a sequel, the plot is set after the events of the previous film, and is intersected with flashbacks to donna's youth in 1979, with some scenes from the two tenses mirroring each other.
due to the financial success of the first film, universal pictures had long been interested in a sequel. the film was officially announced in may 2017, with parker hired to write and direct. in june 2017, many of the original cast confirmed their involvement, with james being cast in the role of young donna that july. filming took place from august to december 2017 in croatia, bordeaux, stockholm, oxford, hampton and at shepperton studios. a british and american joint venture, the film was co-produced by playtone, littlestar productions and legendary entertainment.
mamma mia! here we go again was premiered at the hammersmith apollo in london on july 16, 2018, and was released in the united kingdom and the united states on july 20, 2018, ten years to the week after its predecessor's release, in both standard and imax formats. the film was a box office success, grossing $395 million worldwide and received generally positive reviews, with critics praising the performances and musical numbers.the film is dedicated to the memory of production designer alan macdonald.


== plot ==
in a flashback to 1979, a young donna sheridan graduates from oxford's new college with rosie and tanya (when i kissed the teacher), and dreams of a greek island named kalokaire. donna's mother, ruby, is a famous singer; but she has a strained relationship with her daughter and is consistently away on tour, and does not attend the graduation. fed up with her mother's constant negligence and determined to spend her life making memories, donna decided to travel to kalokaire to find her destiny. 
in paris, donna meets the sweet but awkward harry bright, who instantly falls in love with her (waterloo). they spend the night together, but donna leaves soon after for greece. she misses her boat to kalokairi, but is offered a ride by bill anderson in his yacht and the two dance and flirt (why did it have to be me). on the way, they help a stranded fisherman, alexio, back to shore in time to save the love of his life from having to marry another. unbeknownst to donna, harry has followed her to greece; however, he arrives too late, and sadly watches the boat sailing off in the distance.
in the present, in kalokairi, sophie is preparing for the grand reopening of the hotel bella donna in honour of her recently deceased mother. she is upset because harry and bill, two of her three fathers, are unable to attend due to overseas business ventures. sophie is also in conflict with her husband sky, who's been offered a permanent job in new york (one of us).
rosie and tanya arrive to support sophie, and she shows them the new hotel (i have a dream). this mirrors the past, in which donna explores an abandoned farmhouse which would eventually become the hotel. in the flashback, a heavy storm breaks out, further wrecking the area, and donna discovers a hitched horse and frees it with the assistance of sam carmichael. in the present, a heavy storm causes serious wreckage to the hotel grounds, and prevents transportation to kalokairi and media coverage of the event.
sam reassures sophie that she cannot let her mother down, telling her the story of how he let donna down. years ago, before sophie was born, donna and sam were enjoying a whirlwind romance (the name of the game), but it ended tragically when donna found out sam was engaged to another woman, lorraine. heartbroken, donna breaks up with him and tearfully watches him leave the island (knowing me knowing you), while the present sam reassures sophie of her mother's value for her.
in the past, donna is visited by tanya and rosie, who cheer her up by singing with her as donna and the dynamos (mamma mia). bill returns to the island, and donna joins him on his boat, much to the chagrin of rosie who falls for bill. while they are gone, sam returns, having ended his engagement for donna, but is saddened to hear that she is with another man. donna discovers she is pregnant, but has no idea which one of her three recent lovers is the father. bill's great-aunt sofia overhears donna's wish to stay on the island, and reveals she owns the abandoned farmhouse donna has been staying in. donna happily accepts her offer to stay there, where she eventually gives birth to a healthy baby girl (sophie). 
in the present, rosie explains to sophie how she and bill broke up, causing a worried sophie to affirm her feelings for sky (angel eyes). bill, harry and sky leave their ventures abroad to support sophie, but are told there are no boats to kalokairi. however, a senior alexio gives the trio and many others boat passage as gratitude for saving his relationship. bill and rosie quickly reunite over their mutual grief over donna's death. when the guests arrive at kalokairi (dancing queen), sophie reveals to sky that she is pregnant, and she has never felt closer to her mother.
the celebration is suddenly disrupted when ruby arrives, despite sophie having decided to not invite her. ruby explains that sky tracked her down in new york, and she wants to build a true relationship with her granddaughter. sophie then performs with the dynamos in honour of donna (i've been waiting for you), much to the pride of ruby, who expresses slight but sincere grief over her daughter's death. it is then revealed that the hotel manager, seor fernando cienfuegos, is actually ruby's long-lost lover from 1959, and the two are joyously reunited (fernando).
nine months later, sophie has given birth to a baby boy, named donny. at the christening, donna's spirit proudly watches over her daughter as the two of them have one final moment before donna fully passes on (my love, my life). the end credits show all the characters, including donna and the younger cast, at a huge party at hotel bella donna (super trouper).


== cast ==

amanda seyfried as sophie sheridan, donna's daughter, ruby's granddaughter, sam's stepdaughter, sky's wife, and donny's mother.
meryl streep as donna sheridan-carmichael, founder of donna and the dynamos, sophie's mother, ruby's daughter, sam's late wife, sky's mother-in-law, donny's grandmother and best friend of tanya & rosie.
lily james as young donna.
dominic cooper as sky, sophie's husband and donny's father.
christine baranski as tanya chesham-leigh, one of donna's best friends and former bandmates in donna and the dynamos; a rich three-time divorcee.
jessica keenan wynn as young tanya.
julie walters as rosie mulligan, one of donna's best friends and former bandmates in donna and the dynamos; a fun-loving author in a relationship with bill.
alexa davies as young rosie.
pierce brosnan as sam carmichael, an architect, sophie's stepfather/possible father, ruby's son-in-law, donna's widower, and donny's possible grandfather.
jeremy irvine as young sam.
colin firth as harry bright, a british businessman, sophie's possible father, and donny's possible grandfather.
hugh skinner as young harry.
stellan skarsgrd as bill anderson, a swedish sailor and travel writer, sofia's great-nephew, sophie's possible father, donny's possible grandfather and lazaros's cousin. skarsgard also plays kurt anderson, bill's obese twin brother.
josh dylan as young bill.
andy garca as seor fernando cienfuegos, the mexican manager of the hotel bella donna, old lover of ruby's from 1959. it may also be implied that cienfuegos is sophie's grandfather and donna's father.
cher as ruby sheridan, donna's mother, sophie's grandmother, donny's great-grandmother, and sam's mother-in-law.
maria vacratsis as sofia, bill's great aunt, lazaros's mother, and sophie's namesake, a local who owns the shack in which donna and sam stay and which eventually becomes donna's home.
panos mouzourakis as lazaros, sofia's son
celia imrie as the vice-chancellor of the university at which donna, tanya, and rosie studied.
omid djalili as a greek customs officer.
gerard monaco as alexio
togo igawa as mr. tatyama
naoko mori as yumiko
anastasia hille as dr. inge horvathcameo appearances

bjrn ulvaeus as a university professor.
benny andersson as the pianist in the parisian restaurant during "waterloo".
jonathan goldsmith as don rafael cienfuegos, brother of fernando cienfuegos.


== musical numbers ==

a soundtrack album was released on july 13, 2018 by capitol and polydor records in the united states and internationally, respectively. the album was produced by benny andersson, who also served as the album's executive producer alongside bjrn ulvaeus and judy craymer. each song is featured within the film, with the exception of "i wonder (departure)" and "the day before you came".

 songs featured on the soundtrack album but omitted from the film.additionally, short and instrumental versions of other abba songs were included in the movie, but omitted from the soundtrack. these are in chronological order


== production ==


=== development ===
mamma mia! here we go again was announced on may 19, 2017, with a release date of july 20, 2018. it was written and directed by ol parker. on september 27, 2017, benny andersson confirmed 3 abba songs that would be featured in the film: "when i kissed the teacher," "i wonder (departure)," and "angeleyes." "i wonder (departure)" was cut from the film, but is included on the soundtrack album.


=== casting ===
on june 1, 2017, it was announced that seyfried would return as sophie. later that month, dominic cooper confirmed that he would return for the sequel, along with streep, firth and brosnan as sky, donna, harry, and sam, respectively. in july 2017, baranski was also confirmed to return as tanya. on july 12, 2017, lily james was cast to play the role of young donna. on august 3, 2017, jeremy irvine and alexa davies were also cast in the film, with irvine playing brosnan's character sam in a past era, and hugh skinner to play young harry, davies as a young rosie, played by julie walters. on august 16, 2017, it was announced that jessica keenan wynn had been cast as a young tanya, who is played by baranski. julie walters and stellan skarsgrd also reprised their roles as rosie and bill, respectively. on october 16, 2017, it was announced that singer and actress cher had joined the cast, in her first on-screen film role since 2010. the part was written specifically for cher, and she got to choose andy garca as her romantic partner.


=== filming ===
principal photography on the film began on august 12, 2017 in croatia, including the island of vis. in october 2017, the cast gathered at shepperton studios in surrey, england, to film song and dance numbers with cher. filming wrapped on december 2, 2017.


== release ==
mamma mia! here we go again was released on july 20, 2018 by universal pictures, in the uk, us and other selected countries in both standard and imax formats. the film premiered on july 16, 2018 at the hammersmith apollo in london.


=== marketing ===
the first trailer for the film was released on december 21, 2017, in front of pitch perfect 3, another universal pictures film. cher performed "fernando" at the las vegas cinemacon on april 25, 2018, after footage of the film was shown.
universal sponsored youtube stars the merrell twins to perform a cover version of the song "mamma mia" to promote the film.


== home media ==
mamma mia! here we go again was released via digital copy on october 9, 2018 and released on dvd, blu-ray, and 4k uhd combo pack on october 23, 2018. the film debuted at the top of the
npd videoscan first alert chart for the week ending on october 27, 2018. it retained the top spot on the chart for the week ending on november 3, 2018.


== reception ==


=== box office ===
mamma mia! here we go again grossed $120.6 million in the united states and canada, and $274.4 million in other territories, for a total worldwide gross of $395 million, against a production budget of $75 million.in june 2018, three weeks prior to its release, official industry tracking had the film debuting to $2733 million, which increased to as much as $36 million by the week of its release. it made $14.3 million on its first day, including $3.4 million from thursday night previews. it went on to debut to $35 million, finishing second, behind fellow newcomer the equalizer 2 ($36 million), and besting the opening of the first film ($27.8 million) by over 24%. it fell 57% to $15.1 million in its second weekend, finishing second behind newcomer mission: impossible  fallout. in its third weekend the film grossed $9 million, dropping to fourth place, and $5.8 million in its fourth weekend, finishing seventh.in the united kingdom, the film grossed $12.7 million in its opening weekend, topping the box office and achieving the fourth biggest opening for a film in 2018. in its second weekend of international release, the film made $26.6 million (for a running total of $98.6 million). its largest new markets were france ($1.7 million), poland ($1.3 million), switzerland ($223,000) and croatia ($151,000), while its best holdovers were australia ($9.5 million), the uk ($8.6 million) and germany ($8.2 million). in the united kingdom, the film was the second highest-grossing film of 2018, following avengers: infinity war.


=== critical response ===

on review aggregation website rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 79% based on 275 reviews, and a weighted average of 6.30/10. the website's critical consensus reads, "mamma mia! here we go again doubles down on just about everything fans loved about the originaland my my, how can fans resist it?" on metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 60 out of 100 based on 46 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "a" on an a+ to f scale, the same score as its predecessor, while posttrak reported filmgoers gave it an 83% overall positive score.peter bradshaw of the guardian termed the sequel as "weirdly irresistible" and gave it three out of five stars. he described his reaction to the first film as "a combination of hives and bubonic plague," but concedes that this time, the relentlessness and greater self-aware comedy made him smile. he concludes: "more enjoyable than i thought. but please. enough now." mark kermode of the observer gave the film five stars and commented, "this slick sequel delivers sharp one-liners, joyously contrived plot twists and an emotional punch that left our critic reeling."peter travers of rolling stone awarded the film two and a half stars out of five, noting the absence of streep for the majority of the film hindered his enjoyment, and saying, "her absence is deeply felt since the three-time oscar winner sang and danced her heart out as donna sheridan". lindsay bahr of associated press awarded the film three out of four stars, calling it "wholly ridiculous", but complimenting its self-awareness. she also praised james' performance and singing talent. richard roeper of the chicago sun-times gave the sequel a mixed review, awarding it two stars out of four, criticizing the reprises of "dancing queen" and "super trouper" as uninspired, and feeling that some of the musical numbers dragged the pacing. he considered the younger counterparts to the main characters "energetic" and "likeable." stephanie zacharek of time gave the film a mixed review, writing "mamma mia! here we go again is atrocious. and wonderful. it's all the reasons you should never go to the movies. and all the reasons you should race to get a ticket."


== sequel ==
in june 2020, judy craymer announced that a third film is in development, with the producer confirming that the new abba songs written for the band's reunion will feature in the soundtrack, although stating that the covid-19 pandemic has caused delays with development of the project.


== accolades ==


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
mamma mia! here we go again at imdb
mamma mia! here we go again at allmovie