highway is a 2014 indian road drama film written and directed by imtiaz ali and produced by sajid nadiadwala. the film stars   randeep hooda and alia bhatt. screened in the panorama section of the 2014 berlin international film festival, the film released worldwide on 21 february 2014. the film is based on the episode of the same name from the zee tv anthology series rishtey, starring aditya srivastava and kartika rane, which was also written and directed by imtiaz ali. it tells the story of a girl (alia bhatt) who, for reasons later revealed, discovers freedom after being kidnapped. 


== plot ==
veera tripathi (alia bhatt) is the daughter of a rich delhi-based business tycoon. one day before her wedding, she goes on a drive with vinay - her fianc whom she does not love - and is abducted from a petrol station off a highway, while vinay sits in the car convulsed with fear. the gang of abductors start to panic when they find out that her father has links in the government. however, mahabir bhati (randeep hooda), one of the abductors, is willing to do whatever it takes to see this through.
the men continuously move veera through different cities, to avoid being tracked by police. eventually, when the police forcefully search the truck, veera, surprising even herself, hides. she concludes that she loves the journey and doesn't want to go back to her family and old life. as the days go by, veera finds peace and a new-found freedom, which confuses and frustrates mahabir. veera becomes comfortable with her captors, to the point that she confides in mahabir the horrors of her childhood, when she was sexually abused by her own uncle as a nine-year-old. she views the abduction as a blessing in disguise, since she finally has the chance to experience life and find herself. slowly, she unravels mahabir's story in bits and pieces. his father abused both, him when he was a young child, and his mother who was used as a sex slave by the rich landlords. mahabir escaped and has never returned.
mahabir slowly lets down his guard and begins to care for veera, and his anger fades away slowly. he tries to leave her at a police station in one of the small mountainous towns they stop in. however, veera refuses and insists on staying with mahabir. together, they travel and he starts to fall in love with her. they stay in a hilltop house and veera reveals that one of her many crazy dreams was always to have a small home in the mountains. mahabir becomes emotional seeing the way veera cares for him, reminding him of his mother. both sleep peacefully that night, free from their respective haunting pasts. but the very next morning, police arrive and, during the chaos, shoot mahabir, to which veera reacts emotionally and strongly. it is later revealed that mahabir is killed on the spot. 
she is later brought back to her parents' house, where she recovers from the emotionally draining experience while surrounded by her family members, including her fianc. finally she feels physically better and confronts her uncle who molested her as a child, in front of her family. she yells and breaks down as she asks her father why he warned her only about dangers posed by outsiders, while the real threat was from insiders, the people who had surrounded her since childhood. she leaves the house and goes to live in the mountains where she starts her own factory, buys a house and lives there. the film ends with veera looking at the mountains, then the sky (remembering mahabir). closing her eyes, she sees her nine-year-old self playing happily on the hillside. a boy (mahabir in childhood) joins her. she watches them play, making peace with both the man she loved and their mutual childhood forms.


== cast ==
randeep hooda as mahabir bhati
alia bhatt as veera tripathi
arjun malhotra as vinay
saharsh kumar shukla as goru
pradeep nagar as tonk
durgesh kumar as aadoo
hemant mahaur as kasana
reuben israel as manik kumar tripathi, veeras father
naina trivedi as amma
mohd. kaif as young mahabir
samar mudasir bakshi as young veera


== production ==


=== development ===
in an interview with the telegraph, director imtiaz ali stated, "highway has been a story that has stayed with me for 15 years. there was something in it that didn't die. usually you lose interest in a story beyond a certain point. but with highway, there was something very subtle, yet something very influential". on the story he added, "some years ago, i made a half-hour episode for a tv series (1999 for zee tv's rishtey starring aditya srivastava and kartika rane) and that's where i first got a hint for this story. and over time, it changed form and genres until i just gave up. and then it all settled down to this journey of two characters. as for the central female lead, i thought i would cast someone with some experience of life, someone who had probably been through some relationships. while penning the script he stated he had to change many scenes of the film because he felt they were becoming too similar to his previous film, jab we met. he said that the film was his first digital film. in the april 2013 interview with the same, he said the film is primarily the story of two characters from very different backgrounds played by randeep hooda and alia bhattwho take the road trip across six states in a truck. further, ali told that he had thought of making highway in various ways. at an instant he thought of making it a very big action film later he thought of scripting it in a very romantic way; some 12 years back, he drew romantic instances from qayamat se qayamat tak. he added, "the film is about the discovery of yourself while traveling. its a coming-of-age movie." prior to shooting he didn't complete scripting for the film and the script got ready after the shooting of the scenes because the dialogues were decided on the spot. over the improvisations in script, he stated, "for instance, when we were on the top of snow mountains in himachal pradesh, i wanted to be open to what nature suggested and the impulses the actors gave me, rather than stick to what i had written, sitting in a room in mumbai. the film was made on the way, on the go. i had to have very suitable, good actors and a low maintenance crew." for highway, randeep hooda prepared for his role with such sincerity that in order to keep the initial distance with alia bhatts character, he didnt speak to her for about 25 days.


=== casting ===
ali said that earlier he was looking out for an older actress to match up with hooda. however, the role went to alia bhatt that made effect on his film script. later he added, "i needed somebody who is city slick girl (alia bhatt), who has never been out. but the guy (randeep hooda) had to be somebody who has had a life and understanding of life". about hooda's character, ali stated, "mahabir is also pure enough not to be a prototypical villain. only later in the film, certain things are revealed about him, why hes an oppressor." besides the main casting imtiaz ali and mukesh chhabra cast pradeep nagar as one of the main henchman of randeep.


=== crew ===
as per previous collaboration of ali with the composer a.r. rahman, the latter's inclusion in the project though initially rumored was confirmed by march 2013. in an interview with the telegraph ali stated that he wasnt even thinking of a.r. rahman to score for this film. however, after reading the script rahman agreed to score. in yet another interview ali stated, he and rahman were in touch through skype and rahman enquired about ali's new project and wanted to collaborate after ali deciphered the outline of the story. the film is produced by sajid nadiadwala under his new production house window seat films and imtiaz ali is the co-producer. the cinematography was done by anil mehta. resul pookutty was roped in for the film's sound design. lyricist irshad kamil has penned the songs.


=== filming ===
principal photography began in early march 2013 on highways of india. imtiaz ali quoted, "highway is emotionally charged, physically strenuous". the first look as a snap at the filming location featuring the director and the lead actors was released in march 2013. initially, the director planned to shoot along bengal-bihar-odisha highway road belt but later opted to shoot along the road highways of delhi, haryana, rajasthan, punjab, himachal pradesh and kashmir, making the film first of its kind to shoot such. scenes were shot in kuchaman valley where the sand dunes provided the terrain transitions that were necessarily required. in mid-april 2013, the crew was off to gurais, kashmir to shoot a song and some sequences in the valley. scenes in aru valley and chandanwari near pahalgam in south kashmir were also canned. by early may 2013, nearly seventy percent of the filming was completed. although the entire shooting was planned for 60 days, the team finished in 52 days. on filming scenes, in an interview with the hollywood reporter, ali stated, "i also didn't go for a large camera setup such as cranes and dollies. i wanted the cameras to be easily transported as we were shooting in difficult locations such as mountains. so if i thought the shot would look better from a higher angle, we could move the equipment faster than if we had a heavy setup." officially, the shooting was wrapped up on 28 may 2013.


== music ==

the film soundtrack album is composed by a. r. rahman. the album has nine original songs with lyrics of eight tracks penned by irshad kamil and remaining one by lady kash and krissy. initially, the film was planned with only background score and no songs. the track "maahi ve" sung by a. r. rahman and "patakha guddi (female)" sung by nooran sisters (jyoti & sultana nooran), both these singles framed the score of the theatrical trailer, these tracks clenched second position on itunes india single charts on their respective release dates as singles. the complete soundtrack album had a digital release on 10 january 2014. it debuted on number one position on itunes india and "maahi ve" was the chart topping single.


== marketing ==

marketing began from november 2013 wherein series of behind the scenes footages as episodes titled under the head "highway diaries" were released on bollywood hungama's production blog.
the film's merchandise, consisting head gear, jackets, map scarfs, bags and shirts, all with fabric prints of title logo, were made available for online purchase. on 30 january 2014, alia bhatt promoted the film on the sets of dance india dance. on 13 february 2014, hooda, bhatt, ali, a. r. rahman and the director of disney utv made an appearance at cineworld in feltham to promote the film as well for its first international premiere at the 64th berlin international film festival. ali and alia bhatt promoted the film at an event in taj west end, bengaluru. the leading duo and imtiaz ali appeared on the show comedy nights with kapil to promote the film. actor ranbir kapoor had seen an early cut of the film. he arrived at the film city studios where he, imtiaz ali and alia bhatt moved around in the truck and had a talk about the film. this activity of promotion was filmed for the news channel times now.


== release ==
initially set to release on 12 december 2013, the film's release date was moved to 21 february 2014. the trailer of the film was released on 16 december 2013. on 20 february 2014, a day prior to the film's release, the film had a special screening that was attended by pooja bhatt, mahesh bhatt, imtiaz ali, shazahn padamsee, mukesh bhatt, bhushan kumar, and rekha at the pvr cinemas in mumbai. apart from the guest invitees, critics were specially invited for the film's screening.


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
metacritic gives the film a score of 40 out of 100, based on 5 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".


==== india ====
critic srijana mitra das for the times of india gave the film 3.5 stars out of 5 and stated, "highway is not an easy ride. but it offers fresh breezes and new sights." for mumbai mirror, rahul desai wrote, "highway makes for the kind of cinema we need, perhaps not something we entirely deserve. even if you aren't moved by its unhurried simplicity, or do not agree with this review, i challenge you to resist an overwhelming urge to rush out after dark hoping to get kidnapped (or simpler, just take off) to the foothills of the himalayas. in that itself, is the battle won by a film that strives for little more." he gave the film 4 out of 5. critic sonia chopra for sify gave 4 on 5 and said, "maybe theres no need to intellectualize this beautiful bond and just savour it as it is. just like the film. do not miss!" assigning no rating yet positive critical review, at one india, venkatesh prasad stated, "highway will be a special experience for you, especially if you like road movies. film has some valid points about life in general. watch it and you won't regret your decision." saibal chatterjee for ndtv gave the film 3 out of 5 and wrote, "highway is a must watch as much for what it is as for what it isnt. it is not a typical romantic drama, nor an average love story. it is a road movie with a difference. parmita uniyal for hindustan times writes, "if you are stuck on the crossroads of life, take the highway." the critic described the performance as, "alia bhatt is still a 'student' in bollywood, but can give a lesson or two to many. a natural performer, she nails it in a couple of scenes", whereas for randeep hooda she wrote, " he delivers a nuanced yet controlled performance. he perfects the haryanvi accent to lend authenticity to his character. he's able to get into the skin of his character mahabir bhati. his character opens up and frees himself from the self-imposed shackles towards the end."for rediff, aseem chhabra after viewing the film in berlin quoted, "it is rare that a hindi language film delivers so much promise in the first half. and so it is extremely disappointing when the director and his script lead us on a journey that eventually fizzles out, collapses and dies in front of our eyes". he gave the film 2 stars out of 5. according to movie critic rj akki for firemud fm , "alia bhatt breaks her image from student of the year and mesmerises through her role in the movie. randeep hooda is expressionless till the interval, but still his acting is commendable. imtiaz ali has proved himself all-rounder. to conclude, rj akki gave the film 3 stars out of 5. manohar basu at koimoi stated, "highway whips up all the ingredients required for an intriguing film but goes wrong as a whole. it is bold subject handled flimsily and doesn't come close to believable. there is excessive heavy handedness in the screenplay and somehow the effortless ease that signifies the beauty of imtiazs films is absolutely missing from it. there is far too much of incoherence in the screenplay to bear and though it tried its hand at adding varied hues to multiple layers of the story, one cannot disagree to the fact that it is only rahmans divine music and the pristine cinematography that works here. the film is heart-breakingly mediocre. it is a lenient 2.5/5 for highway" shubhra gupta for the indian express gave the film 2 out of 5 stars, stated that "highway is pretty but stagey, alia bhatt falters in many places".
deepanjali pal for firstpost writes, "a journey with alia bhatt and many road bumps." 
according to critic gayatri sankar for zee news, "highway emerges as a clear winner. it is not meant for movie goers who enter the theatre hoping to see some bizarre fight sequences, masaledar drama, naach-gaana or intense love-making scenes. nonetheless, if you are looking forward to seeing a really hatke love story then highway is your destination." she gave the film 3.5 stars out of 5.


==== overseas ====
priya joshi of digital spy gave it 4 (out of 5) stars: "it's exemplary filmmaking, and the hope is that audiences will take a detour from the confines of commercial bollywood and embrace this wholly edifying experience. highway' will move you in ways you would have never expected." sneha may francis for emirates 24/7 wrote, "barring a sluggish narrative and a few continuity slip-ups, imitiazs movie promises remarkable performances. highway is a road less traveled, and one that we think you must embark on. its a bumpy ride, no doubt, but one thats set in the right direction." deborah young for the hollywood reporter stated that "soul-lifting visuals and a score by a. r. rahman help, but cant save, a pat drama." viji alles for ukasian wrote, "a road-trip movie that not only gives a triumphant two-fingered salute to many films of the genre but to bollywood convention as well." rachel saltz for the new york times putforth, "mr. alis story, though, wanders too long and too far, sometimes coming off like a forced mash-up of it happened one night and patty hearst. no wonder the film cant sustain a tone, wavering between realism and bollywood hokum." assigning the film 3.5 out of 5 stars, critic manjusha radhakrishnan for gulf news stated, "its gritty in parts and unrealistic in some (which hostage would break out into a hip-hop dance on wasteland). but watch this one for bhatt and hooda. they are at their vulnerable, rugged best. plus, if you are in the mood to see india in its raw, unpolished state, highway can be an exhilarating ride." critic zachary wigon for the village voice commented, "imtiaz ali's highway is nothing if not erratic in its narrative delivery  though its fascinating thematic concern remains fixed throughout." he summarized the film - indian 1 percenter kidnapped! then she falls in love! it's bollywood.." ronnie scheib for variety said, "life is literally a highway for kidnapper and victim in this engaging and atypical improvised bollywood road movie." at critic roger joseph ebert's website where the film receives 2.5 stars (out of 4) critic-cum-journalist danny bowes wrote, "highway might be a very good movie indeed. instead, it's an inconsistent, if intermittently splendorous, work. there are, to be perfectly clear, far worse things in life."


=== box office ===
indiathe film was released on over 700 screens across india; mostly in multiplexes. it started slowly with occupancy of 2025% at the theatres but later gained momentum during evening in multiplexes in metropolitan cities like delhi, mumbai, gurgaon, and bangalore collecting 32.5 million (us$460,000)35 million (us$490,000). second day collections were around 40 million (us$560,000)42.5 million (us$600,000) with growth in circuit's like delhi ncr, east punjab, rajasthan and ci. on the fourth day post its release, the film grossed around 25 million (us$350,000) nett taking the overall four-day total to 155 million (us$2.2 million). the complete one week collections after the release accounted for 217.5 million (us$3.0 million). on the eighth day, the film dropped its collections, grossing around 0.75 million (us$11,000) nett. the total business in eight days was around 225 million (us$3.2 million) nett. the film dropped in its second week as it collected 50 million (us$700,000)-52.5 million (us$740,000) nett in its second weekend taking its two-week gross to around 226 million (us$3.2 million) nett.
overseasthe film collected rs 1.78 crores nett ($286,495) from 81 screens in the usa, rs 24.22 lakhs ($39,027) from 12 screens in canada, rs 1.49 crores (aed 881,500) in the uae and rs 1.10 crore (106,581) from 49 screens in the uk box office in the first weekend. the performance of highway is not up to the mark in other foreign countries like australia and new zealand. the film has raked in rs 22.51 lakhs (a$40,391) from 13 screens in australia and rs 5.15 lakhs (nz$10,020) from 6 screens in the new zealand box office in the first weekend. which released in around 250 screens in the international markets, has approximately collected rs 5.58 crores ($900,000) at the overseas box office in the first weekend.


== accolades ==
note  the lists are ordered by the date of announcement, not necessarily by the date of ceremony/telecast.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
highway at imdb
highway at rotten tomatoes
highway at metacritic
highway at box office mojo