hitler (stylized in the film as chiranjeevi hitler) is a 1997  telugu-language drama film produced by m. v. lakshmi under the m. l. movie arts banner, presented by editor mohan and directed by muthyala subbaiah. it stars chiranjeevi, rajendra prasad, rambha  and music composed by koti. the film was released on 4 january 1997 and was both a critical success and box office blockbuster. the movie is said to be the comeback film of chiranjeevi after a series of box office flops. the film was dubbed and released in tamil as tiger.
it is remake of the malayalam film hitler.


== plot ==
madhava rao's mother dies when he is very small, leaving five sisters with him. his father is arrested for killing his mother by beating her in a rage. madhava hates his father but loves his sisters with a fierce protectiveness. he takes care of them and nurtures them very well. they all grow up. madhava is always worried about his sisters and tries to keep them secure. he assaults local youths who try to chat up his sisters, or even look at them. as a result, they label him "hitler". life nevertheless runs fairly smoothly, though all the villagers are careful how they behave around him.
madhava's uncle has two children, balu, who is in love with madhava's second sister, and bujji, who is balu's sister, loves madhava and wants to marry him. one day as madhava is out, mohini asks balu to come to her house, but things go badly when madhava returns home earlier than expected and finds balu in his house. he asks him why he is there and what is he doing, and balu mumbles. enraged, madhava beats him and tells his uncle that he shall not marry his daughter. balu and mohini decide to elope without the consent of madhava. madhava disowns her. all the other sisters, having a soft spot for their sister, start hating their brother for not understanding her love for madhava.
shortly after this, madhava's father is released from jail. he attempts to talk to his son about his mother's death, but madhava will not listen. he leaves to make a new life for himself. some while later, a man who works with his father comes to madhava and tells him that his father is in danger. madhava's father is later murdered. madhava discovers that his father was innocent of his mother's murder and that his uncle's business partners were behind both killings. madhava's father has left a message asking him to take care of the two daughters he had with his second wife. madhava brings them home. madhava's sisters hate them and behave unpleasantly to them. when he discovers this, madhava scolds them. in protest at his authoritarian ways, his sisters all leave the home. the villains see an opportunity to strike at madhava and kidnap his unprotected sisters. madhava rescues them and his sisters ask his pardon for defying him. all ends well.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music was composed by koti. music released by lahari music company.


== box office ==
the film ran over 100 days in many centres and became a popular film for chiranjeevi's performance and cult dance movements.


== references ==


== external links ==
hitler at imdb