holidays is 2010 malayalam film directed by m m ramachandran (atlas ramachandran), starring vinu mohan, ranjith menon, muktha and priya lal in the lead roles. the film is about a few it professionals, who arrive at kochi and get entangled in a web of problems.


== plot ==
the story involves a bunch of youngsters alby (vinu mohan), janet (muktha), riya (priya lal),soumitran (renjith),sudhi (sudheesh) and a few others who are planning the elopement of sudhi and his lover, since sudhi's lover is about to get engaged to vinod (kalabhavan mani) who is also a tough cop.
on the way they rescue a pretty young girl by the name of lekha (sruthi lakshmi) from the hands of a few ruffians, but later find the girl murdered. they flee to a tea estate in munnar, but the murderer is close at hand.


== cast ==
vinu mohan as alby
muktha as janet
priya lal as riya
rejith menon as soumitran
sudheesh as sudhi
sruthi lakshmi as lekha paul
harishree ashokan as thangappan
kalabhavan mani as vinod
anoop chandran as veeramani
roopasree asokan
anil murali
karatte raja
nimisha
urmila unni
ambika mohan as vinod's mother
mini arun
jolly


== production ==
the film is produced by t. satheesh babu, under the banner of cinema factory, and directed by businessman and chairman of atlas group, m m ramachandran (atlas ramachandran). it is his first venture as a director, but he has produced certain critically acclaimed films like vaishali, dhanam etc., and has acted in films like arabikatha, anandabhairavi etc. according to him, the film is aimed at youngsters.the filming occurred at various locations in india like bangalore and kochi and on foreign locales as kuala lampur.


== soundtrack ==
the original score and songs were composed by alex paul, with lyrics penned by kaithapram and santhosh varma. the soundtrack received mixed responses. nowrunning published a positive review commenting that "alex paul's music is the only fair thing in this film." sify's review was negative saying, "alex pauls tunes are pretty ordinary". they also commented that "a song pops out every other moment, which is almost always a dream sequence."


== release and reception ==
the movie was released on 12 november 2010, in thirty six theatres by cinema factory release.
the film was met with nearly unanimous negative reviews. several critics reviewed that the movie lacked a good script and the direction by the businn tycoon was worse than poor. a review by nowrunning.com said that, "holidays is a film that seriously lacks a few things, the most prominent among which would be a script that is worthy of being made into a film and more importantly some sensible direction." sify reviewed the film saying, "with a ridiculous plot that has been presented as a thriller, dr.m m ramachandrans holidays is an amateurish attempt, to say the least. the script, visuals, music and the performances doesnt help in making things better either."


== references ==


== external links ==
nowrunning article
oneindia article
sify review
metromatinee article