holy rollers is a 2010 american independent crime drama film directed by kevin asch and written by antonio macia. it stars jesse eisenberg, justin bartha, ari graynor, danny a. abeckaser and q-tip. the film is inspired by a true story of a young hasidic man who was lured into the world of international drug trafficking in the late 90s.


== plot ==
in 1998, sam gold (jesse eisenberg), is a mild-mannered 20-year-old orthodox jewish man who lives with his large family in the borough park section of brooklyn. sam works in his father mendel's fabric store while studying to be a rabbi. he and his family hope to arrange a marriage for him with zeldy lazar (stella keitel). however, sam's family is much poorer than the lazars, and he worries he will be unable to provide for them.
sam and his best friend leon (jason fuchs) accept a mysterious job offer from leon's brother yosef (justin bartha) and his boss, the israeli jackie (danny abeckaser). under the auspices of visiting a rabbi in atlantic city, yosef sends them to amsterdam, with instructions to wait for him. while there, the pair are given a briefcase, which yosef says contains medicine, and are instructed to walk it through customs in new york. back in new york, after a comment from maxim, yosef's muscle, the pair discover the briefcase contains pure ecstasy. leon wants nothing more to do with yosef or his operation, but sam is attracted to the easy money and decides to continue.
sam becomes a participant in jackie's operation, making trips to amsterdam to pick up suitcases. he is paid to recruit other young orthodox jews as mules, who implicitly trust him as one of their own. sam meets the liberal jewish girl rachel (ari graynor), jackie's girlfriend, and drinks alcohol and takes ecstasy with the gang.  when sam brokers a business deal with european drug manufacturer ephraim (q-tip) that jackie almost abandoned, his influence in the organisation grows, as does his relationships with yosef and rachel, who both take interest in him.
meanwhile, sam slowly leaves the yeshiva. his new job, which he originally covered up as legal importing of medicine, is well-known around his neighborhood, and his parents, fearing their family's reputation in the community, kick him out of the house. sam discovers yosef has been skimming money from jackie through side deals, which sam, fearing the repercussions, objects to. after escaping a failed deal, sam goes to meet jackie, who promptly leaves for a meeting at a nightclub. while alone, rachel attempts to seduce sam and encourage him to run away with her, but fails to do so.
jackie, in a meeting with ephraim and sam, wants to ship street ecstasy, which contains a higher percentage of other drugs, into america. when sam voices his objections, jackie rebuffs him, leading him to have an argument with rachel. sam attempts to convince rachel to escape to lithuania, but rachel, having changed her mind about sam, refuses. sam then decides to continue with the operation despite the added risk; these drugs, carried by unwitting young orthodox jews, are picked up by drug-sniffing dogs and the mules are arrested.
sam, who no longer dresses like an orthodox jew, is not checked at customs with the mules and manages to escape. he goes to warn yosef, who is high at a nightclub. yosef suggests they drive to the west coast to lay low with his cousin. sam, not willing to go with yosef's plan, returns to his childhood home in a panic. he is greeted there by leon, now married to zeldy and studying to become a rabbi as sam was once intended to. sam, realising that he will be arrested, weeps on his front steps as the sirens in the distance grow closer, until a police car pulls up.
in the epilogue, it is revealed that sam and his orthodox mules received 28 months in a federal boot camp, where they became informants of jackie and yosef's operation. over six months between 1998 and 1999, the operation managed to smuggle over one million ecstasy pills to america, via sam and the other mules. jackie and yosef receive 16 years in prison on drug conspiracy charges, while rachel also receives a year for participation. sam and mendel are then seen walking and talking during a visitation, implying that sam has reunited with his family.


== cast ==
jesse eisenberg as sam gold
justin bartha as yosef zimmerman
ari graynor as rachel
danny a. abeckaser as jackie solomon
q-tip as ephraim
jason fuchs as leon zimmerman
mark ivanir as mendel gold
hallie eisenberg as ruth gold
elizabeth marvel as elka gold
david vadim as maxim


== title ==
director kevin asch said he chose the title holy rollers to reference both the protagonist's religious character and the slang term "rolling", which means to be high on ecstasy.


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
as of june 2020, the film holds a 52% approval rating on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, based on 90 reviews with an average rating of 5.44/10. the website's critical consensus reads, "despite a promising premise and a solid central performance from jesse eisenberg, holy rollers lacks the depth necessary to overcome its cliched script." on metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100, based on 23 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".


=== awards and nominations ===
holy rollers was nominated for the grand jury prize at the 2010 sundance film festival and director kevin asch won the breakthrough director award at the 2010 gotham awards.holy rollers also won the "cartier award" at the dauville film festival
the end credit song "darkness before the dawn", written by mj mynarski & paul comaskey, appeared on the best original song shortlist for the  83rd academy awards.


== references ==


== external links ==
officialholy rollers 2010 sundance film festivaldatabaseholy rollers at allmovie
holy rollers at box office mojo
holy rollers at imdb
holy rollers at rotten tomatoesreviewsholy rollers, review, peter bradshaw, the guardian, july 7, 2011
holy rollers, justin chang, variety, january 26, 2010
a drug dealer whos hasidic, mike hale, the new york times, may 20, 2010
sundance review: holy rollers, neil miller, film school rejects, january 26, 2010
ex-hasid pokes holes in holy rollers, jessica pilot, the huffington post, june 8, 2010
holy rollers and the 10-minute bar mitzvah, curt schleier, the jewish daily forward, may 5, 2010