homeboy is a 1988 drama film, directed by michael seresin. it was written by and stars mickey rourke in the role of self-destructive cowboy/boxer johnny walker. christopher walken also stars as walker's slightly corrupt promoter who encourages him to fight whilst hiding from him the fact that one more punch in the wrong place would kill him. 
the film was briefly released in some theatres in 1988 by tristar through their distribution deal with carolco, but was more widely seen on home video shortly after. lionsgate reissued it on dvd on september 1, 2009. shout factory have announced a bluray release for later in 2020.


== plot ==
johnny walker (mickey rourke) is a down-and-out boxer with brain damage who has recently moved into a sea-side resort. he falls in love with ruby, a carnival owner who has a lot in common with johnny. he also befriends wesley pendergrass (christopher walken), a corrupt promoter. wesley and johnny form a strong friendship, and it's clear that johnny comes to idolize wesley who wants to use johnny as muscle in a robbery and asks for his help. johnny has to choose between the love of ruby (debra feuer) or the friendship of wesley.


== cast ==
mickey rourke as johnny walker
christopher walken as wesley pendergass
debra feuer as ruby
thomas quinn as lou
kevin conway as grazziano
antony alda as ray
jon polito as moe fingers
bill slayton as bill
david albert taylor as cannonball
joseph ragno as cotten's trainer
matthew lewis as cotten
willy deville as moe's bodyguard
rubn blades as doctor
sam gray as barber
dondre whitfield as billy harrison
stephen baldwin as luna park drunk


== production ==
exterior shots in asbury park include the boardwalk, the beach, paramount theatre, cookman avenue. shots in belmar include alfred's ice cream cafe and pied piper ice cream. interior shots in asbury park include the convention hall and belmar barber shop in belmar. the tillie mural and the palace amusements building can be seen in the background, a staple of asbury park and its culture.  during the boxing scenes, the convention hall is used as the venue.  this is the first of two times rourke used the famed venue in films.  the second was for 2008's the wrestler.
christopher walken told film comment in august, 1992:

mickey rourke and i were in 'heaven's gate' together; he had this tiny part and i was playing whatsisname. we were sitting up there in the mountains talking about...dinosaurs. and i told him about this thing i had read in some science magazine, that there's a theory that dinosaurs really never disappeared at all. that in fact all they did was get smaller and smaller, their scales turned into feathers and they flew away -- and that in fact dinosaurs are still with us, they're just birds. and mickey said, that's interesting, and he started telling me about this movie that he was going to do someday about a boxer and it was called 'homeboy.' you know, i remember also he told me at the time, there's this guy, the fighter's manager, and you're gonna play this part. i said, okay, mickey, lets go. so almost ten years went by and there we were making it. and i said to him, why dont i tell that story about the birds and dinosaurs? he said, right. and there is that scene at the beach with all the seagulls, talking about dinosaurs.  it's completely disconnected from anything going on in the movie, but i think it's one of the things in the movie...it's real. here are these two guys who are really kind of victims, talking about the origin and destiny of dinosaurs.


== soundtrack ==
see homeboy  original score performed by eric clapton.


== in popular culture ==
in bob dylan's first memoir, chronicles volume one, he writes of a trip to the movies during the recording of the album oh mercy. he writes of mickey rourke:

he could break your heart with a look. the movie traveled to the moon every time he came onto the screen. nobody could hold a candle to him. he was just there, didn't have to say hello or goodbye.dylan would later work with rourke on his film masked and anonymous in 2001.


== references ==
film comment, july/august 1992, "out there on a visit," gavin smith interview with christopher walken


== external links ==
homeboy at imdb
homeboy at rotten tomatoes
homeboy at allmovie
who needs an oscar anyway? mickey rourke's 'homeboy' at popmatters.