honest is a black comedy crime film released in 2000. the film was the directorial debut of ex-eurythmics member dave stewart and starred peter facinelli and three members of the british/canadian girl group all saints: melanie blatt and sisters nicole and natalie appleton.
honest has been called one of the worst films of all time.


== plot ==
the plot follows the antics of three gun-toting, streetwise, saucy sisters in swinging london in the late 1960s. the film is most notable for the topless scenes by the appleton sisters. blatt and the appletons also contributed to three songs on the film's soundtrack.


== reception ==
honest received unfavourable reviews with one critic remarking, "it is the worst kind of rubbish, the kind that makes you angry you have wasted 105 minutes of your life." peter bradshaw noted honest "subscribes to the usual credulous fictions about the charm, glamour and wit of violent criminals, and leaves out these qualities in spades" and added "however silly and implausible, it would be all right if there was the slightest hint of brio or fun in the script, written by comedy giants dick clement and ian la frenais. but there isn't". the scottish daily record went so far as to state that "this turgid tale of sixties london isn't just bad - it's quite probably the worst film ever" and added "and honest is being tipped for a slot in hollywood's hall of shame, ranked alongside duffs like waterworld and the avengers". however, the sunday times gave it 4 stars and called it a "cult classic"  la amazon women on the moon. the film was screened out of competition at the 2000 cannes film festival.the low budget (3 million) film flopped in its opening week in the uk, earning only 111,309 on 220 screens.
british film historian i.q. hunter, discussing the issue of "what is the worst british film ever made?", listed honest as one of the candidates for that title.


== cast ==
nicole appleton - gerry chase
natalie appleton - mandy chase
melanie blatt - jo chase
derek deadman - night watchman
graham fletcher-cook - market trader
vinny reed - stills photographer
naima belkhiati - body painted girl
peter facinelli - daniel wheaton
rick warden - baz
jonathan cake - andrew pryce-stevens
willie ross - woodbine
annette badland - rose
corin redgrave - duggie ord
matt bardock - cedric


== references ==


== external links ==
honest at imdb
honest at rotten tomatoes