hood of horror (a.k.a. snoop dogg's hood of horror) is a horror film adaptation of a fictional comic book, which is an anthology of three short tales set in an urban milieu in a style reminiscent of tales from the crypt and tales from the hood. it was the "secret" ninth film screened in the 8 films to die for film festival on november 19, 2006. it opened worldwide in theaters on may 4, 2007.


== plot ==


=== intro ===
the story starts with devon, a former gangbanger (voiced by snoop dogg) who becomes a hound of hell (hoh). this all happened after he and his crew engaged in a shoot out with liore, (voiced by hawthorne james) the leader of a rival gang that he chases in a car eventually catching up to liore and putting a bullet in his head. devon later learns after going home that his younger sister has died having been hit by a stray bullet from devons gun during the chase. while wandering he is shocked to see liore alive and attacks him only to witness him become a demon and beat devon senseless.
liore says he can grant devon any wish he wants long as he pays a price. devon says he wants his sister to be alive again, liore grants his request by presenting devon a knife saying a blood price must be made. devon decides to take his own life for what he did and slits his throat open, the price paid his sister is alive again and reunited with his mother.
devon is then resurrected by liore having redeemed himself, who now has marked him with the h.o.h tattoo on the back of his neck that all hounds of hell have including knowledge, strength, and the duty to decide who goes to heaven or hell. before leaving liore tells him what he asked his previous master when he became a hound of hell that devons fate is his to decide after devon asks how long he has to stay a hound of hell.


=== crossed out ===
a female tagger named posie (daniella alonso) is an inner city youth who is given the power of life and death in the form of a tattoo on her arm by a dirty and mysterious derelict (danny trejo), later  revealed to be another hound of hell after his eyes glow during the tattoo process. he captured her while she was escaping from gang members fat cap, streako, and nib(teyo johnson, noel gugliemi and jeffrey licon) whom she insulted earlier for covering up her tag. posie holds hatred for gang members after her father killed her mother when she was a child than committed suicide afterwards.
after discovering the power tattoo gives her when she learns from pastor charlie, (billy dee williams) the principle at her school that fat cap died from his own gun going off in his pants when tried to remove them to rape a girl it was after she painted an x on his tag, she than later tries it again. streako after robbing a liquor store tries to give nib a share of the money but nib refuses not wanting any part of it. they flee when the cops arrive, but streako dies after posie crosses his tag forcing him to slip on his beer he poured earlier for fat cap impaling his bottle through his mouth. 
she than goes on killing spree where she finds nibs tag, crosses it out, causing him to die from a phone booth cord that strangles him and rip his throat open. than she crosses out every tag in the neighborhood killing all the taggers including the teens at her school. afterwards she returns to her school where she tags the wall she promised the pastor she paint a mural for. the derelict arrives enraged at posie for what she has done, posie questions him how he said he needed help cleaning up the neighborhood assuming thats why he gave her the power.
the derelict tells her thats not what he meant or intended for her to do. berating her because she could have broken the cycle of murder and violence in her city by painting the mural and bringing something beautiful to her streets with the power, but instead she made it worse and made the wheel of violence spin faster. he takes the power away and sics the zombies of fat cap, streako, and nib on her. they pin her to the wall, slam her spray-paint can in her head and splatter the wall with her blood.
a service is held by pastor charlie where he present a flower mural on the wall of the school to the congregation believing posie kept promise, unaware the mural is made of posie herself with devon and the derelict now cleaned up and looking normal watch on as an eyeball of posie is shown hidden in the bloody painting of the mural.


=== the scumlord ===
racist white couple, tex woods jr. (anson mount) and tiffany (brande roderick), are at the will reading of tex's father tex woods sr (chuck hicks) after he dies "mysteriously" (in reality, he was rundown by his son who didn't want to get cut out of the will). in order for them to receive their share of the inheritance, they have to live with tex sr.s friends; black vietnam vets roscoe, jackson, stevens, and vance (ernie hudson, richard gant, tucker smallwood, l. kenneth richardson) that served under tex jr.s father.
instead of learning tolerance and respect from the vets, tex jr. and tiffany make their lives hell to the point where they hope that they will die and get the full inheritance. they first force them to demolish their own separate rooms to make a master bedroom for tex jr. and tiffany, they than alter the food budget to starve them, and begin harassing their friend wanda; a young nurse aide who has been helping in their time of need. when wanda threatens to call the authorities for the mistreatment and unethical ways  they have been treating the vets, tex jr. and tiffany kill her and hide her body in a freezer. one of the vets later dies just as the couple hoped for, finally urging the vets to seek revenge by busting through the master bedroom door and beating tex woods jr unconscious. 
tiffany dies after she is force fed caviar through a vacuum causing her stomach to explode, tex jr. after his fake pleas to change and saying roscoes name wrong angers him, is dropped down the stairs, impaling him on his bullhorn headpiece for his car. the remaining housemates gain the inheritance of tex woods sr. and celebrate to his and their friends memory and the end of tex woods jr.
soon devon, who is now revealed to be the new landlord greets them and congratulates them on their new wealth. however, it gets crazy after tiffany's pet chihuahua pootie the vets kept starts barking at devon, who shoots at it with his power than calmly
tells the men no pets allowed.


=== rapsody askew ===
a new rapper named sod (pooch hall) is finally starting to gain recognition and fame. during an awards show after his celebration party, he is confronted by clara (lin shaye), a mysterious woman who stops time and is revealed to be another hound of hell. she shows him videos from his up-and-coming days: from when he first met quon, (aries spears) another up an coming mc to quon's last day when he was gunned down in a liquor store by a masked burglar. on the first day he met quon sod promised god he would change and do better if he was given a chance with his music.
quon was always acting as a big brother, defending sod when his ego got out of line demanding ridiculous outfits, jewelry or expensive sets for his music videos. tired of his attitude quon was offered a solo career by their record dealer (jason alexander) after sod's behavior becomes too out of control including having a rape charge from having sex with a minor he let trick him into believing she was an adult. quon refused however and stayed with sod believing he would change.
clara tells sod quon had a chance to focus on the music like they both promised to do and have a life of his own but stood by his side giving it up all up. because of that and breaking his promise to god sods punishment would only get worse.
when sod denies having anything to do with quons death to clara her eyes than give off the glow of an h.o.h like devon and the derelict signaling she was about to unleash sods punishment on him. quon enters the room back from the dead as a zombie with clara taking her leave. quon knows it was really sod and sod's manager jersey (diamond dallas page) who were behind his death. quon reveals to sod how he was wearing a bulletproof vest as well as jersey being the gunman in order for sod to finally be free of him and gain all the fame for himself. quon then brutally kills jersey and frames sod with sods groupies walking in seeing the dead jersey believing sod did it. sod, now knowing with the cops coming his life and career are over tells quon he doesnt regret what he did to him and would do it all over again, he is then gunned down by the police during a shootout where he dies in a elevator.


=== epilogue ===
during all the stories, devon tells the audience that each character had the potential to do good in life, but instead chose to do evil for their own needs that resulted in their deaths. after each segment, he takes all the souls of the deceased characters to a elevator to hell. first pulling posie out of her mural, then dragging tex woods jr. by the horn in his neck, his partner half pint dragging tiffany afterwards.
after claiming sod who wakes up in the elevator, devon takes sod, posie, tex wood jr., and tiffany and sends all of them straight to hell, where all of them are further tormented for eternity. devon tells the viewers that what they saw is both a lesson and warning to all those who walk the line between good and evil choices. when half-pint tries to quit , devon reminds him that he can't because they must do this for all eternity, so they make amends and watch the others being tortured.


== cast ==
intro & wraparounds:

snoop dogg as devon
gabriel pimentel as 'half pint'
hawthorne james as liore (voice)
tayshaun prince as 'footloose'
stephanie leon as young demon girl
robyn shore as gucci demon
mateo baker as stroking demoncrossed out:

daniella alonso as posie santana
danny trejo as derelict
teyo johnson as 'streako'
noel gugliemi as francis "fatcap"
jeffrey licon as 'nib'
andrea leon as mrs. santana
justin fargas as mr. santana
cleo king as miss williams
billy dee williams as pastor charliethe scumlord:

anson mount as tex jr.
brande roderick as tiffany
chuck hicks as tex sr., vietnam veteran
ernie hudson as roscoe
richard gant as jackson
tucker smallwood as stevens
l. kenneth richardson as vance
sydney tamiia poitier as wanda
cricket the chihuahua as pootie the dogrhapsody askew:

pooch hall as 'sod'
aries spears as 'quon'
diamond dallas page as 'jersey'
lin shaye as clara
method man as himself
lamar odom as himself
deance wyatt as kid
jason alexander as british record mogul
jonathan mchugh as record executive
martin shore as record executive
gabriel alexander as executive assistant
jillian difusco as hot girl
shana montanez as groupie
dawn gonzalez as groupie


== soundtrack listing ==
snoop dogg - "welcome to the hood"
flii stylz - "beaztly"
al kapone - "my dead homie"
rainman - "out here"
snoop dogg feat. young walt, terrace martin and tiffany fox - "shake that shit"
the north mississippi allstars - "goin back to dixie"
percy sledge - "24-7-365"
rednex - "cotton eye joe"
c-ride feat. dre - "get ghost"
young hugg and  cj - "da hood"
ill bill feat. skam2 - "thousand to m's"
flii stylz feat. dap daniel - "clownin' out"
lordikim - "stay up"
cool and dre feat. aries spears and  pooch hall - "sod and quon's theme (dramacydal)"
al kapone - "derelict's lair"(not on cd) tangled thoughts - "i'm a rebel"


== see also ==
list of hood films


== references ==


== external links ==
hood of horror at imdb
hood of horror at rotten tomatoes
hood of horror at allmovie