hotel paradiso is a metrocolor 1966 film released by metro-goldwyn-mayer in panavision. it was directed by peter glenville and based on the play l'htel du libre change by maurice desvallires and georges feydeau. the film allowed alec guinness to reprise the role he had played in the london west end theatre production of hotel paradiso, which opened at the winter garden theatre, drury lane, london. on 2 may 1956. guinness played alongside martita hunt (angelique), irene worth (marcelle), frank pettingell (cot), kenneth williams (maxime) and billie whitelaw (victoire). douglas byng also reprised his part from the stage play.


== plot summary ==
playwright monsieur feydeau is staying in the parisian hotel paradiso. he needs to write a new play, but has writer's block. he takes the opportunity to observe his fellow guests: monsieur boniface, henpecked by his domineering wife, and marcelle, the beautiful but neglected wife of henri, a building inspector. henri is sent to the hotel to investigate rumours of ghosts (which turn out to be caused by drains). however, the hotel is the trysting place of marcelle and boniface, who are having an affair.
in the 'by-the-hour' hotel, there are two husbands and one wife, plus henri's nephew and boniface's maid, who are also having an affair. marcelle and boniface's affair is severely compromised (not least by a police raid). all these events provide feydeau with the material for his play, which becomes the succs fou of the next season.


== cast ==
alec guinness as benedict boniface
gina lollobrigida as marcelle cotte
robert morley as henri cotte
david battley as george
ann beach as victoire
marie bell as la grande antoinette
douglas byng as mr. martin
derek fowlds as maxime
eddra gale as guest
peter glenville as the playwright
robertson hare as the duke
daro moreno as the turk
peggy mount as angelique boniface
leonard rossiter as the inspector
akim tamiroff as anniello


== references ==


== external links ==
hotel paradiso at imdb
hotel paradiso at allmovie
hotel paradiso at the tcm movie database
hotel paradiso at the american film institute catalog