hudugaru (english: boys) is a 2011 kannada-language drama film directed by k. madesh, starring puneeth rajkumar, yogesh, srinagar kitty and radhika pandit in the lead roles. the film, which is a remake of the successful 2010 tamil film naadodigal, was produced by parvathamma rajkumar, with v. harikrishna having composed the soundtrack and satya hegde was the cinematographer. the film released on 5 may 2011 and performed well at the box office similar to puneeth's previous film jackie.
the film earned puneeth rajkumar filmfare and siima best actor award in kannada.


== plot ==
three youths  prabhu, chandru, and siddesh (puneeth rajakumar, srinagara kitty and yogesh respectively) aspiring for government jobs, and to settle in dubai are struck with a bad luck in life when sudhir (vishal hegde), a best friend of prabhu falls in love with the daughter of a business tycoon.prabhu with his best friends chandru and siddesh decide to kidnap the daughter of business tycoon so that his friend sudhir (son of former mp) lives happily. in the process of kidnap of sushma fianc of sudhir  prabhu is hit badly on his forehead, chandru loses his right leg and siddesh becomes deaf.
it is not just that in the life of trios. the destiny is very bad when they are back to their native place. prabhu loses his lover for someone, siddesh is sent out from the home, chandru losing a leg finds pavitra, sister of prabhu for his life.
the story takes a curious turn when the marriage out of struggle between sudhir and sushma breaks up. the trio goes back to the same place where they received brutal injuries and question the lovers on separation.


== cast ==
puneeth rajkumar as prabhu
yogesh as siddesh
srinagar kitty as chandru
radhika pandit as gayathri
abhinaya as pavithra
vishal hegde as sudhir
ramya barna as sushma
rangayana raghu as kodanda
sadhu kokila as chinthamani, social worker
avinash as businessman paramashiva murthy
shivarudra naik  kanakapura
vanitha vasu
srinivas prabhu
gururaj hoskote
shanthamma
tabla nani
krishna (kannada actor)
venkata ram
krishna adiga
asharani
honnavalli shrikanth
sudha belawadi
shefali zariwala as pankaja (item number "naa board irada bus")


== release ==
the film released on 5 may 2011 in around 130 plus cinema screens all over karnataka.


== soundtrack ==
v. harikrishna's music for the movie have been widely appreciated. the lyrics are written by jayanth kaikini, yogaraj bhat and v. nagendra prasad. the song "sambo siva" from the original tamil film was retained.


== references ==


== external links ==
hudugaru at imdb