hulchul (transl.commotion) is a 2004 indian hindi-language romantic action comedy film directed by priyadarshan. the story is adapted from the 1991 malayalam film godfather. the film has an all-star cast including akshaye khanna, kareena kapoor, sunil shetty, arshad warsi, amrish puri, paresh rawal, jackie shroff, arbaaz khan, shakti kapoor, farha naaz, and laxmi.


== plot ==
twenty years prior, angar chand (amrish puri) lived a wealthy lifestyle in a small town in india, along with his wife, parvati, and four sons - balram " balli" angar chand (jackie shroff), kishan angar chand (paresh rawal), shakti angar chand (arbaaz khan) and baby jai angar chand (akshaye khanna). balram was of marriageable age and in love with the daughter of laxmi devi (laxmi), who reciprocated his feelings. angar proceeded to arrange the marriage, however, laxmi devi opposed this relationship. during the wedding ceremony, laxmi ordered her sons, surajbhan and pratapbhan to forcibly remove their sister. in anger, laxmi's husband shot his firearm at balram, but instead, parvati was hit and killed. laxmi subsequently married her daughter to kashinath (shakti kapoor). an enraged angar chand hacked laxmi's husband to death in the middle of the road and was arrested and sentenced to 14 years in prison. when he returned home, he declared that women will not be permitted in his property, posting a sign on the front gate, and forbidding his sons to ever marry.
in the present, anjali kashinath  (kareena kapoor), laxmi's maternal  granddaughter, is in college with jai. angar and his family are informed that anjali is to be married off to the home minister of the state. still bearing a grudge, angar tries to break off the engagement and subsequently succeeds by putting political pressure on the minister. jai further humiliates anjali when she returns to college after her failed engagement. laxmi convinces anjali to trick jai into falling in love with her to cause a rift in the family. jai meets with anjali who openly admits that she is attracted to him. jai, at first, rejects her, then decides to teach her and her family a lesson. both feign their love for each other, but subsequently, anjali and jai admit their agendas. both go their separate ways, but find that they are indeed in love with each other. in order to marry, jai must first convince his elder brothers to get married, albeit in vain as none of them even want to consider this option.
lucky (arshad warsi), jai's friend, finds out that kishan (paresh rawal), a seemingly celibate devotee of lord hanuman, is leading a dual life - he has been married to a woman, gopi (farha naaz), for 7 years and has two children, a son, and a daughter. when angar finds out he kicks kishan and jai out of his house because jai supports kishan's marriage.
laxmi arranges for anjali to marry her lawyer's son nikhil (sharad kelkar). after jai and anjali acknowledge their love for each other to her family, anjali's uncles pratap and surajbhan approach angar, asking him to help them stop jai from disrupting her upcoming arranged marriage. jai, kishan, gopi, and lucky sneak into the wedding venue with the help of anjali's uncle veeru (sunil shetty). jai dresses as the bridegroom and goes through the marriage rituals. however, at the end of the ceremony, jai reveals himself and tells his father he won't go through with the final steps of the wedding without his approval.
balram, who previously had supported his father's mentality the most, finally tells jai to place the wedding necklace around anjali's neck, completing the wedding. jai is initially prevented from doing so, but eventually, he and anjali are married. anjali asks her grandmother to end the feud and jai asks his father for forgiveness. angar leaves the wedding and contemplates all his sons' actions on the way home. all brothers and the two wives arrive at the gate. angar looks at his sons and takes the sign off the gate and finally welcomes women back into his family.


== cast ==

akshaye khanna as jai angar chand
kareena kapoor khan as anjali jai chand / anjali kashinath
suniel shetty as veer/veeru
lakshmi as lakshmi devi
jackie shroff as balram " balli" angar chand
paresh rawal as kishen angar chand / murari chand
arbaaz khan as shakti angar chand
arshad warsi as lucky(jai's friend)
farah naaz as gopi kishen chand / gopi murari chand.  (kishen's wife)
deep dhillon as pratap bhan
akhilendra mishra as suraj " surya" bhan
amrish puri as angar chand
asrani as advocate sharma
manoj joshi as mishra (lakshmi's advocate)
sharad kelkar as dr. "sattu" satyendra mishra, advocate's son, whose marriage is fixed with anjali
shakti kapoor as kashinath
upasana singh as mrs. surya bhan
mumaith khan in a special appearance in song lut gayee
zubein khan in a special appearance in song lut gayee
deepali shaw in a special appearance in song lut gayee


== soundtrack ==
according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 10,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's fourteenth highest-selling. the song "rafta rafta" is a hindi remake of the song "aasai aasai" with a slight change in tune from the 2003 tamil film dhool, another film where the music was composed by vidyasagar.

all music is composed by vidyasagar.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
hulchul at imdb 
hulchul at bollywood hungama