hum saath saath hain (transl.we are together) is a 1999 indian hindi-language family drama film written and directed by sooraj r. barjatya. it stars salman khan, sonali bendre, mohnish bahl, tabu, saif ali khan and karisma kapoor, with alok nath, reema lagoo, neelam kothari and mahesh thakur in supporting roles. the story centers on a family headed by ramkishan, containing his wife mamta and three sons.
with a worldwide gross of 810 million (us$11 million), hum saath-saath hain went on to become the highest-grossing film of the year. it received predominantly positive reviews from critics. it was also the first bollywood film to be played in canadian theatres, with six screenings in toronto.
salman khan's performance earned him best actor nomination at the zee cine awards held in 2000. mohnish behl received a best supporting actor nomination at the 45th filmfare awards . the film was also dubbed into telugu and released with the title premaanuraagam.


== plot ==
the film begins when ramkishan, a rich businessman, remarries mamta after his first wife's death. his first wife's death left him with a 1 year-old baby, vivek, who also accepted and respects mamta as his own mother. later ramkishan and mamta have three kids: prem, sangeeta and vinod. some years earlier while trying to save prem in an about to happen accident, vivek is injured and his right hand is paralyzed.
back to the present, prem returns from united states after completing his studies.sangita is married to anand tiwari and has a daughter radhika. vinod is doing his studies. vivek is still receiving treatment for his hand.
on ramkishan and mamta's 25th anniversary celebration, all the siblings wish their parents with respect. after seeing vivek's love for his parents, sadhna, the daughter of ramkishan's business associate adarsh sharma likes him at first sight. adarsh comes to know of her feelings and sends a proposal for vivek to marry his daughter. scared at first due to his hand, vivek later agrees and marries sadhna. on the reception vinod and sapna (daughter of ramkishan's village neighbor dharamraj bajpai) introduce sadhna to the family by staging a musical program and they show the love of prem and preeti (daughter of ramkishan's friend pritam shukla). everyone agrees to engage the two of them. the family decides to go on vacation and they visit their village. eventually, prem and preeti find out about the love interest of vinod and sapna. they get engaged too. however, mamta's three friends and dharamraj fill her head with thoughts as to why vivek should be in charge of the family inheritance. this causes mamta to feel scared about what will happen.
but a bitter turn comes when anand's elder brother anurag cheats on him from inheritance and share in the family business. this makes mamta very paranoid and questions ramkishan's decision to make vivek the head of their family business. she demands that ramkishan divide the business equally between all sons instead of putting vivek in charge. ramkishan disagrees thinking it will divide the family.
heartbroken after finding out about the conversation, vivek instead decides to choose defusion by telling mamta that he will move back to their ancestral village rampur to take care of the new factory recently set up. he asks ramkishan to put prem in charge of the family empire and sadhna supports him. they move to rampur and vinod accompanies them.
upon returning from usa, prem refuses to replace vivek as head of the family. vivek convinces him to go along with the plan in the interest of preventing further conflict within the family. prem confronts mamta and tells her that he will not marry if she wants him to replace vivek. eventually, anurag realizes he made a huge mistake in cheating anand and breaking up his family.
sangita asks mamta to bring back vivek in the house. mamta realizes her mistakes and visits rampur along with ramkishan. in the hospital, sadhna delivers a baby boy. prem marries preeti, vinod marries sapna and anwar marries rehana. dharamraj apologises realising that manners cannot separate the love in family. everyone lives happily ever after.


== cast ==


== filming ==
the maximum principal photography of hum saath-saath hain was done in film city, mumbai, and left portions were shot in jodhpur, rajasthan like the song "mhare hiwade mein naache mor".


=== casting ===
salman khan, mohnish bahl, reema lagoo, alok nath, himani shivpuri, satish shah and ajit vachani who all were part of barjatya's hum aapke hain koun..! were cast in this film. among this salman, lagoo, nath, bahl and vachani appeared in barjatya's maine pyar kiya too.
while discussing bahl's role, it was first offered to anil kapoor and rishi kapoor but upon their refusal bahl was cast to play vivek and prepared it by making a habit of keeping right hand in pocket accordingly the role.
barjatya initially approached madhuri dixit for sadhna's role, who played the lead actress in hum aapke hain koun..! but declined owing to her popularity, and then manisha koirala got the offer; even she was unable to take it due to filming for mann, before tabu was chosen.
later, the makers talked with rishi kapoor again for anand's role, but his refusal came again as did by nitish bhardwaj when offered too, and thus mahesh thakur was roped in.


=== release ===
hum saath-saath hain had released earlier but the music director raamlaxman took time to check the soundtrack album for second time to not suffer any mistake. following all work including post-production, cinematography, choreography and other things was completed followed by promotions, hum saath-saath hain finally hit the theatre screens on november 2, 1999 during diwali.


== music ==
raamlaxman composed the music, teaming up with sooraj barjatya for the third time. the soundtrack features seven songs and playback singers kumar sanu (as prem), alka yagnik (as preeti), kavita krishnamurthy (as sapna) udit narayan (as vinod), anuradha paudwal (as sadhna), hariharan (as vivek), and sonu nigam (as anwar). raamlaxman plagiarised his track "a b c d" from the spanish singer jeanette's 1974 song "porque te vas". savera r someshwar of rediff said that "..it is definitely time for barjatya to look out for a new music director. even the lyrics  barring "maare hidwa ma naache mor" and "mayya yashoda"  are banal...".
-->


== awards and nominations ==


== references ==


== external links ==
hum saath-saath hain at imdb
hum saath-saath hain at rotten tomatoes
hum saath-saath hain at box office mojo
rajshri productions: hum saath saath hain