hum kisise kum naheen (transl.we are not less than anyone) is a 1977 indian musical drama film produced and directed by nasir hussain. it took the third top spot at the box office in 1977.the film stars 
rishi kapoor, tariq khan, kaajal kiran, amjad khan and zeenat aman in sp.app.


== cast ==
rishi kapoor as rajesh / 'fake' manjeet kumar dana
tariq khan as sanjay kumar
kaajal kiran as kajal kisharina
zeenat aman as sunita (special appearance)
amjad khan as saudagar singh
om shivpuri as ram kumar
murad as rajesh's father
tom alter as jack
vimal ahuja as ranjeet kumar dana
ajit khan as sunita's father
bhushan tiwari
sanjeev kumar - special appearance
kamal kapoor as kishorilal


== plot ==
the story begins with a wealthy man selling his entire estate in africa, converting it to diamonds. he carries them in a belt and takes a flight to india. on the way, he suffers a fatal heart attack in the washroom, whilst in the throes of which, he requests a co-passenger to deliver the belt with diamonds to his son, rajesh (rishi kapoor), who works in ashoka hotel, delhi, as a singer-dancer-entertainer. the co-passenger happens to be a rich businessman named kishorilal (kamal kapoor).
almost immediately, kishorilal is chased by goons who are after the diamonds. he escapes them temporarily and flies to delhi, but finds them waiting for him as he exits the airport. running from them, he enters a cycle shed (a parking place for bicycles), stashes the belt in the toolbox of a bicycle, and hides out of sight. the bicycle belongs to sanjay kumar (tariq khan), who is unaware that his bicycle has 25 crore rupees worth of diamonds hidden in its toolbox, and rides away with the bike before kishorilal can see who he is. saudagar singh (amjad khan) is actually the one on whose behalf those goons were after the diamonds. his plans having been thwarted as described above, saudagar singh and his partner baljit kumar dana set a trap for rajesh telling a false story to him about kishorilal having kidnapped saudagar singh's son, ramesh. taken in by their story, rajesh hatches a plot to spirit away kishorilal's daughter, kajal (kajal kiran), by pretending to be in love with her, and, once he has her in her clutches, to thereby extorting the diamonds back from kishorilal.
the whole plot is speedy after that, with rajesh pretending as manjeet kumar dana is to fall in love with kajal (kajal kiran), who is in love with her childhood love, sanjay. there is a series of meetings between the two. a few years ago when motherless kajal's father kishorilal was in a deep financial crisis, sanjay's father gave shelter to him, who has now become extremely rich. the promise of getting sanjay and kajol married is forgotten when kishorilal insults them and forgets the promise that was made years previously. to unfold the plot, sanjay becomes manjeet's manager. saudagar uses manjeet to get the diamonds himself in the climax.


== special effects ==
special effects were added by rauko effects service.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by r. d. burman. it included nine original songs. 
the song "kya hua tera vada" won mohd rafi both filmfare best male playback singer and national film award. the song "bachna ae haseeno" was one of the biggest chart-busters of 1977 and was the title of film produced by yash chopra films in 2007.
this film was released at a time when the swedish pop group abba were at the peak of their popularity all over the world, including in india. one of their songs "honey honey" was featured in the movie, playing in the background just before the song "kya hua tera waada" begins. the song "mil gaya humko saathi" that is sung by kajal during the competition is heavily inspired from the abba smash hit song "mamma mia."the music songs was composed by rahul dev burman and the lyrics were penned by majrooh sultanpuri.


== awards and nominations ==
national film awards 1977national film award for best male playback singer - mohammad rafifilmfare awards - 1977winsfilmfare award for best male playback singer - mohammad rafi - "kya hua tera wada"
filmfare award for best cinematographer - munir khan
filmfare award for best art direction - shanti dassnominationsfilmfare award for best music director - r.d. burman
filmfare award for best lyricist - majrooh sultanpuri for "kya hua tera wada"
filmfare award for best female playback singer - sushma shreshta - "kya hua tera wada"
filmfare award for best supporting actor - tariq


== references ==


== external links ==
hum kisi se kum nahin at imdb