hum aapke dil mein rehte hain (transl.i live in your heart) is a 1999 indian hindi-language romantic drama film directed by satish kaushik and produced by d. ramanaidu for his production company suresh productions. it stars kajol and anil kapoor, with anupam kher, shakti kapoor and parmeet sethi in supporting roles. written by jainendra jain, the film tells the story of megha (kajol), the wife of industrialist vishwanath (anil kapoor), who was deceived by him for a one-year contract.
hum aapke dil mein rehte hain serves as a remake of telugu-language film pavitra bandham (1996). with a budget of 62.5 million (us$880,000), principal photography took place in india and switzerland and finished in december 1998. kabir lal served as the cinematographer, while e.m. madhavan, chaitanya tanna and marthand k. venkatesh edited the film. the music was composed by anu malik and the lyrics were written by sameer.
hum aapke dil mein rehte hain was released on 21 january 1999 and emerged as a commercial success, grossing 366.5 million (us$5.1 million). it received mixed-to-positive critical reviews, with mostly praise directed towards its story and kajol's performance. for her portrayal, kajol was nominated for best actress at the 45th filmfare awards, the only nomination for the film at the ceremony.


== plot ==
vishwanath is a multi-millionaire industrialist, living with his only son, vijay. after vijay completed his education in the united states, vishwanath forces him to get married but vijay refuses to, saying that he still wants to be single. disappointed, vishwanath (who is suffering from diabetes) tries to convince his son with sweets; it makes vijay immediately agrees to his demand. megha, a hardworking girl struggling to support her family, is vishwanath's personal assistant in his office. vishwanath asks megha to quit her job and marry his son, but she refuses when she hears vijay wants the marriage to be on a contract basis for a year and, if he does not fall in love with his wife in that duration, the marriage will be annulled and megha will get money as a return. however, megha's family is in dire financial straits and, so, she has to reconsider this offer.
vijay and megha are married. after the marriage, they become friendly with each other and megha goes out of her way to look after vijay after he is in a car accident. at the end of the year, however, vijay decides to annul the marriage, as had been agreed upon, and he regards her as a friend. megha leaves vijay and returns home. after the separation, vijay seems to be enjoying himself; but slowly and eventually, he starts to feel regret after he found the facts that she gets social sanctions for the contract.
in order to support herself, megha starts a job in a new company; to her surprise, when the company's managing director arrives, he turns out to be vijay. he later confesses to her that he is a changed person and wants her back. but, even after repeated persuasion, she disagrees because her faith in him has been shattered. vijay continues to pursue her. later, megha finds out that she is pregnant with vijay's child. near the completion of her pregnancy, she along with her family then hold a ceremony for the well-being of her to-be-born child. in the ceremony, which vishwanath and vijay attends, megha reveals that the latter to be her husband and tells all the guests about the marriage-contract. an argument follows; vijay and his father walk out, followed by all the guests.
vijay and his friends make a plan to lure megha to meet him again. his friends tell her that troublemakers khairati lal and yeshwant kumar, who had once attempted to kill vijay in the car accident, have escaped from prison. they are out looking for vijay, who had fired them from his father's company for cheating and fraud. megha gets anxious and tries to reach vijay as soon as possible. on the way, she learns that the whole thing was a set-up, when she caught one of vijay's friends call him by a payphone. enraged, megha goes to confront vijay. as soon as she meets him, she accuses him of this act; however, lal and kumar really come to kill vijay, but they run away when they hear megha's footsteps. vijay then staggers towards her, with his stomach pierced by a piece of glass and blood pouring from the wound. megha runs toward him, slips and goes into labour. vijay, summoning up all his strength, takes megha to the hospital. there, he is treated for his injuries and she delivers a healthy baby boy. megha and vijay recover and get reconciled.


== cast ==
the cast is listed below.

kumar sanu, anuradha paudwal and anu malik made special appearances in the song "kasam se kasam se".


== production ==
the film is a remake of muthyala subbaiah's 1996 telugu-language film pavitra bandham, and it marks the producer d. ramanaidu's return to hindi cinema after a long hiatus; he had last produced taqdeerwala in 1995. in an interview with rediff.com, ramanaidu said that his involvement in the project was a way to prove his mettle as a producer in the hindi film industry: "as far as telugu films are concerned, i have achieved whatever i wanted to. i want to hit the jackpot in bollywood with this film." anil kapoor was cast as the antagonist vijay and anupam kher as his father, vishwanath. according to kapoor, the role had changed his screen image, and he later stated that he took the part to avoid typecasting. meanwhile, kajol was cast as the film's protagonist megha, her first such role. interviewed by the telegraph, she stated that her role "seemed like a great character on paper, but [it] didn't translate well on screen".satish kaushik was suggested by kapoor, who has collaborated with him in several films, including mr. india (1987), joshilaay (1989) and ram lakhan (1989), to direct this film. kaushik compared it with his two previous directorial venturesthe action film roop ki rani choron ka raja (1993) and the romantic drama prem (1995)and found that hum aapke dil mein rehte hain was "very different", explaining that it "emphasised feelings and that the accent here was on treatment"; for instance, the former was dominant with costume and the latter was based on reincarnation. he said, "i do not resort to any gimmicks in [hum aapke dil mein rehte hain]. i'm not playing with camera angles or juggling shots. you will not find 50 dances here... my film has been set against a contemporary backdrop." jainendra jain and bhupati raja wrote the dialogue and story, respectively.made on a budget of 62.5 crore (equivalent to 200 crore or us$28 million in 2019), principal photography of hum aapke dil mein rehte hain started in hyderabad and handed by kabir lal. saroj khan and chinni prakash were the choreographers, while raja was the action director. its production design was completed by sharmishta roy. some songs were recorded at the hotel de rougemont in switzerland. after filming finished around december 1998, it was edited by e.m. madhava, chaitanya tanna and marthand k. venkatesh.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack for hum aapke dil mein rehte hain was completed by anu malik and the lyrics were written by sameer. it contains nine songs, with vocals performed by kumar sanu, anuradha paudwal, udit narayan, alka yagnik, sonu nigam, hema sardesai, rahul seth, anu malik, abhijeet bhattacharya, shankar mahadevan and anuradha sriram. the album was released on 21 december 1998 by t-series.


== release ==
produced by suresh productions and distributed by melody international, hum aapke dil mein rehte hain was released on 22 january 1999 and ran at theatres for 25 weeks. it faced strong competition from rishi kapoor's aa ab laut chalen, gulzar's hu tu tu and shakeel norani's bade dilwala, all of which were released on the same day. the film opened to a wide audience, with 190 screens across india, and grossed 5.7 million (us$80,000) on its opening day. hum aapke dil mein rehte hain earned 18.4 million (us$260,000) on its first weekend and 36.4 crore (us$5.1 million) after its first week. box office india estimated the film's total gross at 290 million (equivalent to 1.0 billion or us$14 million in 2019) in india and $1.8 million overseas, and concluded its final commercial performance with the verdict "super hit". the film thus emerged as one of the highest-grossing female-led films of the year.the world television premiere of hum aapke dil mein rehte hain happened in october 2000 on doordarshan. a dvd version was released on 17 july 2007 in a single-disc pack. it was available for streaming on amazon prime video since may 2019.


=== critical reception ===
hum aapke dil mein rehte hain addressed the issue of prenuptial agreement. it received mixed-to-positive reviews, with critics praising its story, melodramatic climax and the performances, mostly that from kajol. sharmila taliculam, writing for rediff.com, described the film as a "usual run-of-the-mill story", noting its "sprinkling of drama, comedy, fight [and] romance". she opined that kajol "manages her role well", with "her eyes [giving] good effect in many scenes", and thought her chemistry with kapoor managed to "save the film from going downhill in a rush". taliculam argued that kapoor's portrayal, which she found "par excellence", would remind the audiences of his roles in lamhe (1991), mr. bechara (1996) and judaai (1997). a critic from entertainment portal bollywood hungama said, "hum aapke dil mein rehte hain is a good enough film if you go for that kind of family tear-jerker." k. n. vijiyan of the new straits times shared similar thoughts, saying, "[it] will be a treat for those who love anil kapoor and kajol, and for those who want something different." in a column for the same publication, he added that the story is "quite refreshing".planet bollywood's anjali abrol, who gave the film 7 out of 10, called both kajol and kapoor's acting "commendable", and further wrote that "kajol went a bit overboard with her stubbornness, and the audience went from sympathizing with her to being annoyed with her". abrol also noted the costume and make-up along with punjabi nuance and gujarati-language dialogues in the film, but criticised a comedic scene where satish kaushik and johnny lever do what the critic called as "horrifying telephone war". conversely, mukhtar anjoom of the times of india saw that the comedic scene make the film "clean and enjoyable". deepa gahlot thought that the film's story was inspired by indian mythologies and folk tales. in eena meena deeka: the story of hindi film comedy, sanjit narwekar said that kaushik had proved himself as "a leading director" with the film's success.


=== accolades ===


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==

hum aapke dil mein rehte hain at imdb
hum aapke dil mein rehte hain at bollywood hungama