hum tumhare hain sanam (transl.i am yours, darling) is a 2002 hindi-language romantic drama film directed by k. s. adhiyaman. it features shahrukh khan, madhuri dixit and salman khan , with aishwarya rai in a cameo appearance.
the movie is k. s. adhiyaman's first in hindi, a remake of his own tamil film, thotta chinungi. it took five years to make, with huge sabbaticals between shoots due to production problems. the rights of the film was owned by shah rukh khan's red chillies entertainment.hum tumhare hain sanam is the third film to feature the two-khans together after the blockbusters karan arjun (1995) and kuch kuch hota hai (1998). dixit was cast opposite both khans for the fourth timeshe worked with salman khan in the flop dil tera aashiq (1993) and the blockbusters saajan (1991) and hum aapke hain koun..! (1994); and with shah rukh khan in anjaam (1994), koyla (1997), and dil to pagal hai (1997).


== plot ==
dev narayan (alok nath) lives with his widowed daughter laxmi (aruna irani) and her children radha and prashant. dev also looks after two orphaned children, gopal and nita. laxmi believes that dev is taking more care of gopal and nita, so she leaves the house with her children. when she spots an orphaned boy on the streets, she takes him in. radha forms a sisterly bond with him and names him suraj.
years later, suraj (salman khan) is now a famous and popular singer. radha (madhuri dixit) is particularly fond of him  suraj is grateful to her for contributing to his success. meanwhile, gopal (shah rukh khan) has become a wealthy business tycoon. when laxmi is killed in an accident, radha and prashant (atul agnihotri) are taken to live in gopal's house. also living with them is nita (suman ranganathan). gopal asks radha to marry him and she agrees. before their wedding, suraj asks gopal to watch over radha, as he loves her like a sister. on their wedding night, gopal asks radha who she loves most in the world. she answers her mother and prashant. gopal is hurt that she did not mention him. as time goes on, he starts to disapprove of two things. first, he does not like the fact that he and radha are supporting prashant financially and second, he does not like the fact that radha is always on the phone with suraj. after a misunderstanding, he loses his temper and throws prashant out of the house.
gopal soon suspects that suraj and radha are secretly seeing one another and throws her out of his house too. radha goes to live with her relatives. everybody thinks that radha has simply moved out for a few days. however, when gopal sends radha a divorce note, suraj realizes the situation. he and prashant tell radha they wish to speak to gopal, but radha does not want them to do so. suraj secretly holds a meeting with him anyway. gopal angrily confronts him, pulls out a loaded gun, and asks suraj to shoot him. after an argument, he leaves. suraj now believes that he is the reason for radha's divorce and feels guilty. he is determined to set things right. radha realizes that gopal was angry about her relationship with suraj. she and suraj agree never to meet again.
suraj explains the situation to his girlfriend suman (aishwarya rai). suman talks to gopal and explains where he went wrong. gopal realizes that he misunderstood radha and suraj's sibling relationship for adultery. just as radha is about to commit suicide, gopal stops her and they reconcile. they visit suraj at his show. gopal and suraj apologize to one another and things end well.


== cast ==
shah rukh khan as gopal
madhuri dixit as radha chauhan
salman khan as suraj
atul agnihotri as prashant chauhan
suman ranganathan as nita chauhan, prashant's wife
alok nath as dev narayan chauhan
aruna irani as laxmi chauhan
laxmikant berde as hasmukh
vikas anand as ramu
asha sharma as mona saxena
dinesh hingoo as gopal's lawyer
aishwarya rai as suman verma (special appearance)


== production ==
production was first reported in february 1996 when it was revealed that producer k. c. bokadia had signed on k. s. adhiyaman to remake his successful tamil film thotta chinungi (1995) into hindi. initially it was revealed that sunny deol, juhi chawla and aamir khan were to play the three lead roles, though there ended up being a total change of cast, with salman khan, madhuri dixit and shahrukh khan replacing them.


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by nadeem-shravan, nikhil-vinay, daboo malik, bappi lahiri, bali brahmabhatt, and sajidwajid. lyrics were penned by sameer, praveen bhardwaj, maya govind, kartik avasthi, and jalees sherwani. the background score was composed by uttam singh. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 16,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's fifth highest-selling.


=== track listing ===


== critical reception ==
variety wrote that "despite a cast that "reunites" some of hindi cinema's biggest names, the long-awaited hum tumhare hain sanam, which finally preemed in late may, reps a major disappointment, of interest offshore only to bollywood historians". empire online noted that "love triangles are a common device in bollywood flicks, and sadly, hum tumhare hain sanam has nothing new to offer". a critic from radio times stated that "nuance isn't a bollywood speciality, and there's little in the way of subtle shading here but, with its impressive all-star cast and songs from some of india's leading composers, this enjoyable melodrama can't be beaten for big, bold emotion". the times of india wrote that "the film is a ready reckoner for everything that should be avoided in a good film".reviewer anita bora writes "a medium-sized dose of love with a big dash of suspicion. add to it several scoops of friendship. towards the end, add a few drops of humor". she even says that "the premise of the film is simple. jealousy. if you discount the fact the 'falling in love' was instant (but when is it not?), the topic is quite interesting. haven't we all at some point read too much into situations, overreacted, undergone pangs of jealousy that seem downright silly later?"


== box office ==
hum tumhare hain sanam grossed 22.26 crore (us$3.1 million) in india and $2.55 million (12.49 crore) in other countries, for a worldwide total of 34.76 crore (us$4.9 million), against its 12 crore (us$1.7 million) budget. it had a worldwide weekend opening of 11.11 crore (us$1.6 million), and grossed 17.23 crore (us$2.4 million) in its first week. it is the 4th-highest-grossing bollywood film of 2002 worldwide.


=== india ===
it opened on friday, 24 may 2002, across 300 screens, and earned 1.42 crore (us$200,000) nett on its opening day. it grossed 4.14 crore (us$580,000) nett in its opening weekend, and had a first week of 6.84 crore (us$960,000) nett. the film earned a total of 13.52 crore (us$1.9 million) nett, and was declared successful at the box office. it is the 10th-highest-grossing film of 2002 in india.


=== overseas ===
it had an opening weekend of $875,000 (4.28 crore) and went on to gross $1.215 million (5.95 crore) in its first week. the film earned a total of $2.55 million (12.49 crore) at the end of its theatrical run. overseas, it is the 3rd-highest-grossing bollywood film of 2002.


== references ==


== external links ==
hum tumhare hain sanam at imdb