hum hain rahi pyar ke (we are travelers on the path of love) is a 1993 indian romantic comedy-drama film, directed by mahesh bhatt and produced by tahir hussain, with screenplay written by aamir khan and robin bhatt, and with a musical score by nadeem-shravan. it stars juhi chawla and aamir khan in the lead roles, with sharokh bharucha and kunal khemu in supporting roles. upon release, the film fetched the filmfare best actress award for juhi chawla. the film has also garnered the national film award - special jury award / special mention (feature film), and the filmfare best film award. the film's plot is heavily inspired by the 1958 movie house boat. the film was remade in telugu as bhale maavayya starring suman.


== plot ==
rahul malhotra (aamir khan) is the caretaker of a garment company that has a pending order of one lakh shirts to mr bijlani. rahul is also the guardian of his deceased sister's mischievous kids: sunny, munni, and vicky. he finds it hard to control the kids, as he is new to this. when the kids cause trouble, rahul punishes them by locking them in their room. however, the children escape and head for a carnival in town.
vyjayanti (juhi chawla) is the bubbly daughter of a south indian businessman and music-lover. her father wants her to marry natarajan, an south indian music legend, who is somewhat creepy. vyjayanti refuses to marry him; as punishment, she is also locked up and escapes. she meets the three kids at the carnival and they become friends. vyjayanti explains that she has no home so the children invite her to stay with them.
the children go to great lengths to hide vyjayanti from rahul. in a row of hilarious sequences, they are always one step ahead of rahul before he can discover vyjayanti. two nights later however, vyjayanti is revealed. initially angry, rahul sees that the children love her so he gives her a job as the children's governess. vyjayanti begins to live with rahul and the kids and slowly falls in love with him.
and then there enters seductive, glitzy maya, bijlani's daughter, who is obsessed with rahul. she wants to marry rahul, and rahul approves, deciding that it would benefit the children. when vyjayanti and the children find out about maya and rahul's upcoming engagement ceremony, vyjayanti is heartbroken and the kids are upset, as they dislike maya. on the day of the engagement, vyjayanti explains to the kids that she loves rahul and wants to marry him. the kids come up with a plan to stop the engagement. they crash the party with a dramatic act, which successfully postpones the engagement but angers rahul. back home, he scolds vyjayanti and she admits that she loves him, shocking him.
the next morning, bijlani comes with maya to offer rahul a second chance. rahul defends vyjayanti against their insults, thereby expressing his own love for her. the mischievous kids chase bijlani and maya out of the house with rotten eggs and tomatoes. as revenge, bijlani and maya set on auctioning rahul's house. rahul asks his workers to work overtime to make up for the shirt orders, which the supportive workers agree to. a successful two lakh shirts are made and loaded onto a truck to be delivered to bijlani. bijlani hires some thugs to ensure that the truck doesn't arrive on time. much to their distaste, rahul arrives on time with the order, and bijlani and maya are arrested.
vyjayanti is reunited with her father, who disapproves of her marrying anyone outside the iyer clan. all the factory workers, rahul's colleagues, and the children ask him to allow rahul and vyjayanti to marry. with so much persistence, he accepts and vyjayanti and rahul are married in a south indian ceremony.


== cast ==
juhi chawla as vyjayanti iyer
aamir khan as rahul malhotra
dalip tahil as bijlani
navneet nishan as maya
k.d. chandran as mr. iyer, vyjayanti's father
veeru krishnan as natrajan iyer
tiku talsania as adv. homi wadia
mushtaq khan as bhagwati prasad mishra "mishraji"
javed khan as thief chhotya
baby ashrafa as munni chopra
sharokh bharucha as vicky chopra
master kunal khemu  as sunny chopra


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the movie was composed by the music duo nadeem shravan and lyrics were contributed by sameer. songs like 'ghunghat ki aad se', 'kash koi ladka mujhe pyar karta' and 'bombai se gayi poona' became extremely popular. alka yagnik won the national award for the song 'ghunghat ki aad se'.


== trivia ==
the script and screenplay has been credited to both robin bhatt and aamir khan in the beginning credits of the film. interestingly, aamir khan has always been inclined towards producing films for children. beginning this league with hum hain rahi pyaar ke, which is more of a family drama than an out an out children's film, aamir took the step further in his later career by making films featuring children as protagonists. these films were taare zameen par and secret superstar. both films were commercially and critically successful.
while hum hain rahi pyaar ke became a success in theaters, it was also well received on the home video sales front. it was once reported that the film made a record of vhs video cassettes sales in the market on the first week of its home video release.


== box office ==
hum hain rahi pyar ke was a 'superhit' at the box office. it was also one of the biggest hits of 1993. the performances of juhi chawla and aamir khan were critically and commercially acclaimed. juhi chawla, became the box office queen of 1993. her other films like lootere, aaina, shatranj, izzat ki roti & darr became big box office success, solidifying her career as the top actress of 1990s.
winners

filmfare best film award - tahir hussain
filmfare best actress award - juhi chawla
filmfare best lyricist award - sameer for ghunghat ki aad se
national film special jury award - mahesh bhatt
national film award - best female playback singer  - alka yagnik for "goonghat ki aad se"nominated

filmfare best director award - mahesh bhatt
filmfare best actor award - aamir khan
filmfare best music director award - nadeem-shravan
filmfare award for best female playback singer - alka yagnik for hum hain rahi pyar ke


== references ==


== external links ==
hum hain rahi pyaar ke at imdb