hum (transl.we) is a 1991 indian hindi-language action crime film directed by mukul s. anand. it stars amitabh bachchan, rajinikanth, govinda, kimi katkar, deepa sahi, shilpa shirodkar, danny denzongpa, anupam kher and kader khan. this was the most successful film for the famous super star bachchan in the early '90s before he announced his temporary retirement (for five years) immediately after its release. he also won the filmfare best actor award for it in 1992. the film was the second highest-grossing indian film of 1991 at the box office and was a blockbuster. the movie was an inspiration for the 1996 kannada movie soma. before that, it was adapted into the 1995 tamil movie baashha starring rajinikanth in the lead which went on to be remade in kannada in 2001 as kotigobba , in bengali in 2003 as guru and in bangladeshi in 2001 as sultan starring mannna. dilwale (2015) also was loosely inspired by this film.


== plot ==
bhaktawar (danny denzongpa) rules over the docks in mumbai, treating his workers like slaves. despite his general dissatisfaction with this regime, tiger (amitabh bachchan) extorts money from the dock workers for his father pratap (deepak shirke), who in turn works as an enforcer for bhaktawar.
tiger is in love with his best friend gonsalves (romesh sharma)'s sister jumma (kimi katkar). gonsalves is against bhaktawar's policies and is killed by bhaktawar and in the subsequent fall-out, tiger's father and stepmother also die, leaving two young half-brothers, kumar and vijay, with tiger.
tiger immediately sets out to kill bhaktawar but is stopped by inspector girdhar (anupam kher). girdhar reminds tiger to fulfil his dying stepmother's wish and take care of his brothers while leaving the police to deal with bhaktawar. girdhar and his faithful sidekick havaldar arjun singh (annu kapoor) steal money from bhaktawar's safe and set fire to bhaktawar's house to destroy any evidence, murdering bhaktawar's wife and his daughter. police later arrest bhaktawar for killing tiger's family and sends him to jail. tiger escapes in a train and jumma refuses to leave with tiger, as his brothers should be his priority. jumma and tiger promise to reunite in the future. girdhar bombs the train carrying tiger and his brothers to eliminate any possible witnesses of his crime, but they escape.
years later, tiger has renamed himself shekhar and is a respectable farmer and timber merchant in ooty. kumar (rajnikanth) is a police officer married to aarti (deepa sahi), and they have a young daughter jyoti (sanjana). the youngest brother, vijay (govinda), is a college student. vijay is in love with anita (shilpa shirodkar), daughter of general rana pratap singh (kader khan), who wants his daughter to marry a military officer. shekhar and his brothers lead a happy family life. neither of the two youngest brothers seems to have any memory of their time in mumbai and both regard shekhar as their elder brother. jumma is now a successful actress, while girdhar and havaldar are leading a luxurious life off the money they stole from bhaktawar.
bhaktawar is released from jail and is manipulated by giridhar into believing that tiger killed bhaktawar's family. to seek revenge, bhaktawar tracks down tiger in ooty. he kidnaps aarti and jyothi in bangalore and tells them the truth about shekhar. meanwhile, kumar also learns shekhar's true identity and blames him for his wife and child's kidnapping. however, all misunderstandings are cleared by jumma when she explains vijay and kumar about their past and the sacrifices made by shekhar for them to lead a respectable life.
later tiger, along with kumar and vijay, rescue aarti and jyoti and explain to bhaktawar that it was giridhar who had murdered his family. bhaktawar then ties himself along with giridhar to a bomb and they both die due to the explosion. the film ends with the family happily united.


== cast ==


== production ==
hum was shot in various locations including mumbai, ooty, and mauritius. mukul s. anand had considered and discussed a potential scene for this film with rajinikanth, where amitabh bachchan's character would help govinda get a seat in the police academy. anand discarded the scene, because he did not find it suitable. but rajinikanth felt the scene had the potential to develop into a script for a possible feature film, which resulted into the 1995 tamil film baashha.in 1990 at wembley stadium london amitabh bachchan performed and danced to the song jumma chumma with sridevi even before the film and song were released.


== music ==
the soundtrack was composed by laxmikantpyarelal. two songs were inspired by guinean singer mory kant's 1987 album akwaba beach, with "jumma chumma de de" being based on kante's "tama", while "ek doosre se" was based on kant's "inch allah".lyrics are written by anand bakshi.
the film's soundtrack album sold 3 million units. however, the music rights were sold for only 30 lakh ($132,000).


== box office ==
the film grossed 16.75 crore (equivalent to 116 crore or us$16 million in 2019) in india, including a net income of 9.25 crore. it was the year's second highest-grossing film at the indian box office.


== accolades ==


== references ==


== external links ==
hum at imdb