humpty sharma ki dulhania (transl.humpty sharma's bride) is a 2014 indian hindi-language romantic comedy film written and directed by shashank khaitan in his directorial debut, and produced by hiroo yash johar and karan johar under the banner of dharma productions. the film stars varun dhawan as the titular character rakesh, alia bhatt as kavya pratap singh and debutante television actor sidharth shukla as angad, in the lead roles. humpty sharma ki dulhania notes the second pairing of the leads after their debut in student of the year and was released on 11 july 2014 and emerged a commercial success. a quasi-sequel, badrinath ki dulhania, was released in 2017.


== plot ==
kavya pratap singh, a beautiful, educated and stylish punjabi girl from ambala who is set to be engaged to an nri american doctor, angad, decides to go to delhi to buy an expensive designer bridal dress for her wedding, after her father, kamaljeet, refuses to get her the pricey dress. she meets rakesh "humpty" sharma, a young and flirtatious punjabi boy in delhi, who is interested in her. humpty, with the help of his friends, shonty and poplu, chases kavya, but she's not interested. he, however, manages to befriend her. kavya confides in humpty, that her friend in delhi, gurpreet sodhi, was blackmailed by her ex-boyfriend, who had secretly filmed a sex sequence of the two.
humpty stumbles upon an idea for victimizing gurpreet's ex that would also avenge gurpreet, and also gather the money for the wedding dress for kavya. they manage to get some money but kavya isn't happy about the way that money is obtained. however, these ensuing adventures make kavya fall for humpty, and that night they have sex before she's supposed to leave for ambala. when humpty asks her if she loves him, she says she won't go against kamaljeet's wishes. in order to help humpty get the money for kavya's dress, his father and friends chip in. kavya reluctantly accepts the money and leaves delhi.
kavya is a changed person when she arrives home. she tells her family that she has decided not to buy that expensive dress. in the meantime, she gifts a fancy car to humpty using that money, as she had known about humpty's father's dream for a car. overwhelmed, humpty and his friends go to ambala, where he tries to win over kavya. kamaljeet believes firmly in arranged marriages against love marriages, as his elder daughter, swati, married against his wishes and the marriage turned out to be a disaster ending in divorce. kamaljeet instantly disapproves of humpty, and gets him, and his friends beaten up. upon repeated persuasion, he gives humpty a chance to find at least one reason why his daughter shouldn't marry angad. he sets him a five-day deadline to give him the reason. humpty and his friends try their best to find flaws in angad but fail to do so.
at the end of the deadline and on her wedding day, kavya runs away from home and calls humpty to join her on a train to leave the town to which he refuses and convinces kavya to get off the train. in the meantime kamaljeet and the rest of the family reach the train station, where kavya and humpty are embracing each other. kamaljeet, assuming the pair was eloping, is enraged and hits humpty, who gives a powerful and touching explanation saying that he may not be as rich, successful or good-looking as angad, but he loves kavya from the core of his heart. he leaves ambala and heads back to delhi after that incident. when kavya is dressed up as a bride, kamaljeet asks her if she still fancies that expensive wedding dress. she replies she's not fit for expensive classy dress, but is suitable for local dresses. he gets the idea that her relationship would be fuller with humpty, the local boy and not angad, the american doctor. he brings everyone to delhi where he approaches humpty and gives his consent to marry his daughter.


== cast ==
varun dhawan as rakesh "humpty" kumar sharma
alia bhatt as kavya pratap singh
sidharth shukla as angad bedi
ashutosh rana as kamaljeet pratap singh, kavya's father
aditya sharma as kavya's brother, ranjeet
deepika amin as kavya's mother, mrs. pratap singh
mahnaz damania as kavya's sister, swati
gaurav pandey as shonty.
sahil vaid as poplu.
kenny desai as humpty's father, mr. kumar sharma
guncha narula as kavya's friend, gurpreet
shivani mahajan as humpty's teacher, mrs. chibber


== development ==
in august 2013, dharma productions confirmed that varun dhawan and alia bhatt would be portraying the main leads. this was the second time the pair would be seen together after student of the year, directed by karan johar. johar in a press conference said that the film is a tribute to the cult romantic classic dilwale dulhaniya le jayenge.
filming took place in mumbai with a second schedule completed on 12 march in punjab. filming took place in vaseela in march 2014 with more planned for ambala and chandigarh. the filming was completed in ambala, chandigarh, khan market and delhi university, at a budget of 175 million (us$2.5 million).the song "saturday saturday" was filmed in mumbai film city recreating the colosseum for a futuristic avatar song with om prakash as the director of photography and with ahmed khan as the choreographer.


== soundtrack ==
the film's soundtrack is composed by sachin-jigar and shaarib-toshi with lyrics penned by kumaar, irshad kamil and shashank khaitan.the song "saturday saturday" was the first single track released, which was originally composed by the titans, badshah and recreated by sharib-toshi. the song "samjhawan" was originally taken from 2010 punjabi film virsa and recreated by sharib-toshi, with vocals by arijit singh and shreya ghoshal. the second single track "mein tenu samjhawan ki" is sung by actress alia bhatt while lyrics have been given by lyricist kumaar. dj chetas composed the humpty mashup also known as humpty sharma ki dulhania mashup.


== awards ==
stardust awards 2014stardust award for breakthrough performance  male  sidharth shukla
best actor (romance / comedy)  varun dhawan
best actress (romance/comedy)  alia bhatt7th mirchi music awardsmale vocalist of the year  arijit singh  "samjhawan"
female vocalist of the year  shreya ghoshal  "samjhawan"
song representing sufi tradition  "samjhawan"


== sequel ==

in may 2016, it was announced that khaitan will write and direct another romantic comedy under the dharma productions banner with dhawan and bhatt playing the lead roles. although the two films will have different plots and characters, the film is considered the second installment in the dulhania franchise that began with humpty sharma ki dulhania. the second installment, titled badrinath ki dulhania, released on 10 march 2017.


== references ==


== external links ==
humpty sharma ki dulhania at imdb