hyenas (french: hynes) is a 1992 senegalese film adaptation of friedrich drrenmatt's swiss-german satirical tragicomedy play the visit (1956), directed by djibril diop mambty. the intimate story of love and revenge parallels a critique of neocolonialism and african consumerism. it was entered into the 1992 cannes film festival.


== plot ==
hyenas (hyenas) tells the story of linguere ramatou, an aging, wealthy woman who revisits her home village of colobane. linguere offers a disturbing proposition to the people of colobane and lavishes luxuries upon them to persuade them. this embittered woman, "as rich as the world bank", will bestow upon colobane a fortune in exchange for the murder of dramaan drameh, a local shopkeeper who abandoned her after a love affair and her illegitimate pregnancy when she was seventeen.


== cast ==
ami diakhate as linguere ramatou
djibril diop mambty
mansour diouf as dramaan drameh
calgou fall as the priest
faly gueye as mme. drameh
mamadou mahourdia gueye as the mayor
issa ramagelissa samb as the professor


== critical response ==
critical response to the film was mostly positive. rotten tomatoes reported that 69% of critics gave the film positive reviews based upon a sample of 159, with an average score of 3.7 out of 5. hyenas was nominated for the golden palm award at the 1992 cannes film festival.
"a timeless story...the strong story line and fine ensemble acting provide a faster, more easily assimilated rhythm than many african films." - variety
"this pungent film adaptation's change of locale lends the tale a new political dimension...(mambety) inflects the grim drama with an edge of carnival humor. this film carries a sting!" - the new york times
"this wicked tale, told with wit and irony, has all the ingredients of a crowd-pleaser." - the village voice
"funnier and warmer than drrenmatt ever dared to be but with the tale's bleak, ominous edges still in evidence." - new york newsday


== references ==
notes

bibliography

"california newsreel - hyenas". california newsreel. archived from the original on 20 december 2010. retrieved 25 january 2011. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)


== external links ==
hyenas at imdb
hyenas at allmovie
hyenas at rotten tomatoes
hyenas at the tcm movie database