an ijazah (arabic: , "permission", "authorization", "license"; plural: ijazahs or ijazat) is a license authorizing its holder to transmit a certain text or subject, which is issued by someone already possessing such authority. it is particularly associated with transmission of islamic religious knowledge. the license usually implies that the student has acquired this knowledge from the issuer of the ijaza through first-hand oral instruction, although this requirement came to be relaxed over time. an ijaza providing a chain of authorized transmitters going back to the original author often accompanied texts of hadith, fiqh and tafsir, but also appeared in mystical, historical, and philological works, as well as literary collections. while the ijaza is primarily associated with sunni islam, the concept also appears in the hadith traditions of twelver shia.george makdisi, professor of oriental studies, theorized that the ijazah was the origin of the university academic degree as well as the doctorate.  professor of arabic, alfred guillaume (soas); professor of sociology, syed farid al-attas (national university of singapore) professor of middle eastern studies, devin j. stewart (emory university) agree that there is a resemblance between the ijazah and the university degree. however, toby huff and others reject makdisi's theory. devin j. stewart notes a difference in the granting authority (individual professor for the ijazah and a corporate entity in the case of the university).


== description ==

in a paper titled traditionalism in islam: an essay in interpretation, harvard professor william a. graham explains the ijazah system as follows:

the basic system of "the journey in search of knowledge" that developed early in hadith scholarship, involved travelling to specific authorities (shaykhs), especially the oldest and most renowned of the day, to hear from their own mouths their hadiths and to obtain their authorization or "permission" (ijazah) to transmit those in their names. this ijazah system of personal rather than institutional certification has served not only for hadith, but also for transmission of texts of any kind, from history, law, or philology to literature, mysticism, or theology. the isnad of a long manuscript as well as that of a short hadith ideally should reflect the oral, face-to-face, teacher-to-student transmission of the text by the teacher's ijazah, which validates the written text. in a formal, written ijazah, the teacher granting the certificate typically includes an isnad containing his or her scholarly lineage of teachers back to the prophet through companions, a later venerable shaykh, or the author of a specific book.


== hypothesis on origins of doctorate ==
according to the lexikon des mittelalters and a history of the university in europe, the origin of the european doctorate lies in high medieval teaching with its roots going back to late antiquity and the early days of christian teaching of the bible. this view does not suggest any link between the ijazah and the doctorate. george makdisi has instead stated that the ijazah was a type of academic degree or doctorate issued in medieval madrasahs, similar to that which later appeared in european medieval universities. devin j. stewart also sees a parallel, and asserts that "the license to teach law and issue legal opinions was clearly an actual document of official or legal standing," while also noting a difference in the granting authority (individual professor for the ijzazah and a corporate entity in the case of the university). the theory of an islamic origin of the degree was originally proposed in the 1930s by alfred guillaume, who cited the ijazah as a precursor to the licentia docendi, which syed farid al-attas agrees with.makdisi, in a 1970 investigation into the differences between the christian university and the islamic madrasah, was initially of the opinion that the christian doctorate of the medieval university was the one element in the university that was the most different from the islamic ijazah certification. in 1989, though, he said that the origins of the christian medieval doctorate ("licentia docendi") date to the ijzah al-tadrs wa al-ift' ("license to teach and issue legal opinions") in the medieval islamic legal education system. makdisi proposed that the ijazat attadris was the origin of the european doctorate, and went further in suggesting an influence upon the magisterium of the christian church. according to the 1989 paper, the ijazat was equivalent to the doctor of laws qualification and was developed during the 9th century after the formation of the madh'hab legal schools. to obtain a doctorate, a student "had to study in a guild school of law, usually four years for the basic undergraduate course" and at least ten years for a post-graduate course. the "doctorate was obtained after an oral examination to determine the originality of the candidate's theses," and to test the student's "ability to defend them against all objections, in disputations set up for the purpose" which were scholarly exercises practiced throughout the student's "career as a graduate student of law." after students completed their post-graduate education, they were awarded doctorates giving them the status of faqih (meaning "master of law"), mufti (meaning "professor of legal opinions") and mudarris (meaning "teacher"), which were later translated into latin as magister, professor and doctor respectively.madrasas issued the ijazat attadris in a single field, the islamic religious law of sharia. other academic subjects, including the natural sciences, philosophy and literary studies, were treated "ancillary" to the study of the sharia. the islamic law degree in al-azhar university, the most prestigious madrasa, was traditionally granted without final examinations, but on the basis of the students' attentive attendance to courses. however, the postgraduate doctorate in law was only obtained after "an oral examination." in a 1999 paper, makdisi points out that, in much the same way granting the ijazah degree was in the hands of professors, the same was true for the early period of the university of bologna, where degrees were originally granted by professors.  he also points out that, much like the ijazat attadris was confined to law, the first degrees at bologna were also originally confined to law, before later extending to other subjects.however, several other scholars have criticized makdisi's work. norman daniel, in a 1984 paper, criticized an earlier work of makdisi for relying on similarities between the two education systems rather than citing historical evidence for a transmission. he stated that makdisi "does not seriously consider the spontaneous recurrence of phenomena", and notes that similarities between two systems do not automatically imply that one has created the other. he further states that there is a lack of evidence for schools in the short-lived arab settlements of france and mainland italy, which makdisi argues may have been links between the islamic and european educational systems, as well as a lack of evidence of the alleged transmission of scholastic ideas between the two systems altogether. in a discussion of makdisi's 1989 thesis, toby huff argued that there was never any equivalent to the bachelor's degree or doctorate in the islamic madrasahs, owing to the lack of a faculty teaching a unified curriculum.


== differences between an ijazah and a diploma ==
the western form of education is widely what is adapted today and used throughout the globe. this education system draws particular attention to a formal educational institution  the university. groups of individuals are taught by a faculty composed of many professors, each recognized as experts in their respective fields, and upon completion of a curriculum students receive a diploma. the diploma is documentation verifying that the university institution as a whole recognizes a certain individuals knowledge and capabilities within a particular field of study.
the ijazah on the other hand has a much different approach in spreading knowledge. emphasis is placed on one to one instruction rather than the institution as a whole. with the emphasis being on the relationship between student and the instructor the location is not necessarily of significant importance; much of where the education is being attained depends on the subject matter being thought, religious matters were largely thought in mosques, medicine in hospitals, while other subjects may have been thought in madrasas or other locations. upon completion of education in a subject a student would be examined orally by their instructor, much like students are to present a thesis in the modern-day education system. if a student successfully completed examination, they were to receive certification stating the subject in which they had expertise through their individual instructor; this documentation was referred to as an ijazah and unlike the diploma it was not associated with the institution it was attained but rather solely with the instructor.


== demographics of students ==
during the middle ages the need for individuals to be educated became more and more prevalent as reading and writing became a vital method of communication in societies. students that attained ijazahs came from all walks of life, and access to knowledge was not known to be limited by age, gender or race. while the majority of students earned ijazahs in an advanced portion of their life (in their 30's and 40's) there are many notable exceptions to this social norm indicating that knowledge was not limited by societal constraints but rather the talent and devotion of the student. throughout history barriers to education have existed especially for women however, ijazahs defied many of these limits. unlike western societies ijazahs were not limited to men as was seen with diplomas, women in islamicate societies were known to not only earn ijazahs but also to instruct other students. western societies were also known to limit access to education for women by preventing them from attending formal educational institutions, only wealthy women were only able to acquire basic education in the privacy of their own homes . this was not the case with the ijazah many women are known to have traveled from their homes to learn and transmit knowledge. the fact that the demographic of a student often did not limit their ability to attain an ijazah can be observed by studying the lives of individuals such as zaynab bint al-kamal who is a widely renowned women scholar of the hadith and a child prodigy earning her first ijazahs and the permission to transit her knowledge at the age of six years old. studying the life of zaynab bint al-kamal revels that students attaining ijazahs were able to defy many standards that were set by other societies of the appropriate age and gender to receive a formal education. when it comes to race and ethnicity muslim scholars were widely accepting of individuals from all backgrounds. major efforts were made by islamic scholars throughout history to translate academic works so more individuals could understand and interpret subject matter, the acceptance of individuals from all walks of life can be seen in institutions such as the house of wisdom were academic knowledge from societies across the globe was studied and appreciated.


== example of a quran ijazah ==

for example the famous reciter of the quran in our modern era: sheikh ra'ad bin mohammad al-kurdi, from his teacher sheikh sherzad abdulrahman bin tahir, and his ijazah is as follows:the example of the following quran ijazah has the chain of quran recitation (qi'raa of hafs) from the present day tracing all the way back to the prophet muhammad.


== see also ==


== references ==