indiapakistan relations (hindi: - ; urdu:   ) refer to the bilateral relations between india and pakistan. the relations between the two countries have been complex and largely hostile due to a number of historical and political events. relations between the two states have been defined by the violent partition of british india in 1947 which started the kashmir conflict, and the numerous military conflicts fought between the two nations. consequently, their relationship has been plagued by hostility and suspicion. northern india and pakistan somewhat overlap in certain demographics and shared lingua francas (mainly punjabi, sindhi, and hindustani).
after the dissolution of the british raj in 1947, two new sovereign nations were formedthe dominion of india and the dominion of pakistan. the subsequent partition of the former british india displaced up to 12.5 million people, with estimates of loss of life varying from several hundred thousand to 1 million. india emerged as a secular nation with a hindu majority population and a large muslim minority, while pakistan, with a muslim majority population and a large hindu minority, later became an islamic republic, although its constitution guaranteed freedom of religion to people of all faiths. it later lost most of its hindu minority due to migration and the separation of east pakistan in the bangladesh liberation war.
soon after gaining their independence, india and pakistan established diplomatic relations, but the violent partition and reciprocal territorial claims quickly overshadowed their relationship. since their independence, the two countries have fought three major wars, as well as one undeclared war, and have been involved in numerous armed skirmishes and military standoffs. the kashmir conflict is the main centre-point of all of these conflicts with the exception of the indo-pakistan war of 1971 and the bangladesh liberation war, which resulted in the secession of east pakistan (now bangladesh).
there have been numerous attempts to improve the relationship, notably the shimla summit, the agra summit, and the lahore summit. since the early 1980s, relations between the two nations have grown increasingly sour, particularly after the siachen conflict, intensification of the kashmir insurgency in 1989, indian and pakistani nuclear tests in 1998, and the 1999 kargil war. certain confidence-building measures, such as the 2003 ceasefire agreement and the delhilahore bus service, have been successful in de-escalating tensions. however, these efforts have been impeded by periodic terrorist attacks. the 2001 indian parliament attack brought the two nations to the brink of a nuclear war. the 2007 samjhauta express bombings, which killed 68 civilians (most of whom were pakistani), was also a crucial turning point in relations. additionally, the 2008 mumbai attacks carried out by pakistani militants resulted in a severe blow to the ongoing indiapakistan peace talks.
after a brief thaw following the election of new governments in both nations, bilateral discussions again stalled after the 2016 pathankot attack. in september 2016, a terrorist attack on an indian military base in indian-administered kashmir killed 19 indian army soldiers, the deadliest such attack in years. india's claim that the attack had been orchestrated by a pakistan-supported jihadist group was denied by pakistan, which claimed the attack had been a local reaction to unrest in the region due to excessive force by indian security personnel. the attack sparked a military confrontation across the line of control (loc), with an escalation in ceasefire violations and further militant attacks on indian security forces. since 2016, the ongoing confrontation, continued terrorist attacks, and an increase in nationalist rhetoric on both sides has resulted in the collapse of bilateral relations, with little expectation that they will recover. notably, following the 2019 pulwama attack, the indian government revoked pakistan's most favoured nation trade status, which it had granted to pakistan in 1996. india also increased the custom duty to 200% which affected the trade of pakistani apparel and cement.since the election of new governments in both india and pakistan in the early 2010s, some attempts have been made to improve relations, in particular the development of a consensus on the agreement of non-discriminatory market access on reciprocal basis (ndmarb) status for each other, which will liberalise trade. both india and pakistan are members of the south asian association for regional cooperation and its south asian free trade area. pakistan used to host a pavilion at the annual india international trade fair which drew huge crowds. deteriorating relations between the two nations resulted in a boycott of pakistani traders at the trade fair.
in november 2015, indian prime minister narendra modi and pakistani prime minister nawaz sharif agreed to the resumption of bilateral talks; the following month, modi made a brief, unscheduled visit to pakistan while en route to india, becoming the first indian prime minister to visit pakistan since 2004. despite those efforts, relations between the countries have remained frigid, following repeated acts of cross-border terrorism. according to a 2017 bbc world service poll, only 5% of indians view pakistan's influence positively, with 85% expressing a negative view, while 11% of pakistanis view india's influence positively, with 62% expressing a negative view.


== seeds of conflict during independence ==

massive population exchanges occurred between the two newly formed states in the months immediately following the partition. there was no conception that population transfers would be necessary because of the partitioning. religious minorities were expected to stay put in the states they found themselves residing in. however, an exception was made for punjab, where the transfer of populations was organized because of the communal violence affecting the province, this did not apply to other provinces.the partition of british india split the former british province of punjab and bengal between the dominion of india and the dominion of pakistan. the mostly muslim western part of the province became pakistan's punjab province; the mostly hindu and sikh eastern part became india's east punjab state (later divided into the new states of punjab, haryana and himachal pradesh). many hindus and sikhs lived in the west, and many muslims lived in the east, and the fears of all such minorities were so great that the partition saw many people displaced and much inter-communal violence. some have described the violence in punjab as a retributive genocide. total migration across punjab during the partition is estimated at around 12 million people; around 6.5 million muslims moved from east punjab to west punjab, and 4.7 million hindus and sikhs moved from west punjab to east punjab. 
according to the british plan for the partition of british india, all the 680 princely states were allowed to decide which of the two countries to join. with the exception of a few, most of the muslim-majority princely-states acceded to pakistan while most of the hindu-majority princely states joined india. however, the decisions of some of the princely states would shape the pakistan-india relationship considerably in the years to come.


=== junagadh issue ===

junagadh was a state on the south-western end of gujarat, with the principalities of manavadar, mangrol and babriawad. it was not contiguous to pakistan and other states physically separated it from pakistan. the state had an overwhelming hindu population which constituted more than 80% of its citizens, while its ruler, nawab mahabat khan, was a muslim. mahabat khan acceded to pakistan on 15 august 1947. pakistan confirmed the acceptance of the accession on 15 september 1947.
india did not accept the accession as legitimate. the indian point of view was that junagadh was not contiguous to pakistan, that the hindu majority of junagadh wanted it to be a part of india, and that the state was surrounded by indian territory on three sides.
the pakistani point of view was that since junagadh had a ruler and governing body who chose to accede to pakistan, it should be allowed to do so. also, because junagadh had a coastline, it could have maintained maritime links with pakistan even as an enclave within india.
neither of the states was able to resolve this issue amicably and it only added fuel to an already charged environment. sardar patel, india's home minister, felt that if junagadh was permitted to go to pakistan, it would create communal unrest across gujarat. the government of india gave pakistan time to void the accession and hold a plebiscite in junagadh to pre-empt any violence in gujarat. samaldas gandhi formed a government-in-exile, the arzi hukumat (in urdu: arzi: transitional, hukumat: government) of the people of junagadh. patel ordered the annexation of junagadh's three principalities.
india cut off supplies of fuel and coal to junagadh, severed air and postal links, sent troops to the frontier, and occupied the principalities of mangrol and babariawad that had acceded to india. on 26 october, nawab of junagadh and his family fled to pakistan following clashes with indian troops. on 7 november, junagadh's court, facing collapse, invited the government of india to take over the state's administration. the dewan of junagadh, sir shah nawaz bhutto, the father of the more famous zulfiqar ali bhutto, decided to invite the government of india to intervene and wrote a letter to mr. buch, the regional commissioner of saurashtra in the government of india to this effect. the government of pakistan protested. the government of india rejected the protests of pakistan and accepted the invitation of the dewan to intervene. indian troops occupied junagadh on 9 november 1947. in february 1948, a plebiscite held almost unanimously voted for accession to india.


=== kashmir conflict ===

kashmir was a muslim-majority princely state, ruled by a hindu king, maharaja hari singh. at the time of the partition of india, maharaja hari singh, the ruler of the state, preferred to remain independent and did not want to join either the dominion of india or the dominion of pakistan. he wanted both india and pakistan to recognise his princely state as an independent neutral country.despite the standstill agreement with pakistan, teams of pakistani forces were dispatched into kashmir. backed by pakistani paramilitary forces, pashtun mehsud tribals invaded kashmir in october 1947 under the code name "operation gulmarg" to seize kashmir. they reached and captured baramulla on 25 october. instead of moving on to srinagar just 50 km away and capturing its undefended airfield, they stayed there for several days. kashmir's security forces turned out to be too weak and ill-equipped to fight against pakistan. fearing that this invasion would bring about an accession to pakistan, the maharaja now turned to india and requested india for troops to safeguard kashmir. indian prime minister nehru was ready to send the troops, but the acting governor general of india, lord mountbatten of burma, advised the maharaja to accede to india before india could send its troops. hence, considering the emergent situation he signed the instrument of accession to the union of india on 26 october 1947.
charles chenevix trench writes in his 'the frontier scouts' (1985):

in october 1947... tribal lashkars hastened in lorries - undoubtedly with official logistic support - into kashmir... at least one british officer, harvey-kelly took part in the campaign. it seemed that nothing could stop these hordes of tribesmen taking srinagar with its vital airfield. indeed nothing did, but their own greed. the mahsuds in particular stopped to loot, rape and murder; indian troops were flown in and the lashkars pushed out of the vale of kashmir into the mountains. the mahsuds returned home in a savage mood, having muffed an easy chance, lost the loot of srinagar and made fools of themselves.

according to pakistani general mohammad akbar khan, the raiders "delayed in baramulla for two (whole) days for some unknown reason."while the invading pakistanis spread across the state and looted baramulla town just 50 km from the state capital, srinagar, for several days starting 25 october 1947, the maharaja signed instrument of accession to the dominion of india on 26 october 1947. sheikh mohammad abdullah had already reached delhi a day earlier on 25 october to persuade nehru to send troops. he made no secret of the danger the state faced and asked nehru to lose no time in accepting the accession and ensuring the speedy dispatch of indian troops to the state. (sheikh abdullah corroborates this account in his aatish-e-chinaar (at pages 416 and 417) and records (at page 417) that v.p. menon returned to delhi on 26 october with signed instrument of accession.) the instrument was accepted by the governor-general of india the next day, 27 october 1947. with this signing by the maharaja and acceptance by the governor-general, the princely state of jammu and kashmir became a part of dominion of india as per the indian independence act 1947 passed by the british parliament.
by this time the raiders were close to the capital, srinagar indian troops were airlifted from delhi, landed at srinagar airport in kashmir on 27 october 1947 and secured the airport before proceeding to evict the invaders from kashmir valley.
the indian troops managed to evict the aggressors from parts of kashmir but the onset of winter made much of the state impassable. after weeks of intense fighting between pakistan and india, pakistani leaders and the indian prime minister nehru declared a ceasefire and sought u.n. arbitration with the promise of a plebiscite.
in 1957, north-western kashmir was fully integrated into pakistan, becoming azad kashmir (pakistan-administered kashmir). in 1962, china occupied aksai chin, the north-eastern region bordering ladakh. in 1984, india launched operation meghdoot and captured more than 80% of the siachen glacier.
pakistan now maintains kashmiris' right to self-determination through a plebiscite and the promised plebiscite should be allowed to decide the fate of the kashmiri people. india on the other hand asserts that with the maharaja's signing the instrument of accession, kashmir has become an integral part of india.
due to all such political differences, this territorial claim has been the subject of wars between the two countries in 1947 and 1965, and a limited conflict in 1999. the state remains divided between the two countries by the line of control (loc), which demarcates the ceasefire line agreed upon in the 1947 conflict modified in 1972 as per shimla agreement.


== wars, conflicts and disputes ==

india and pakistan have fought in numerous armed conflicts since their independence. there are three major wars that have taken place between the two states, namely in 1947, 1965 and the bangladesh liberation war in 1971. in addition to this was the unofficial kargil war in 1999 and some border skirmishes. major conflicts between india and pakistan, war of1947 and war of 1965, and a small-scale kargil war in 1999, were triggered by conflict over the border of kashmir. while both nations have held a shaky cease-fire agreement since 2003, they continue to trade fire across the disputed area. both nations blame the other for breaking the cease-fire agreement, claiming that they are firing in retaliation for attacks. on both sides of the disputed border, an increase in territorial skirmishes that started in late 2016 and escalated into 2018 killed hundreds of civilians and made thousand homeless.


=== war of 1965 ===

the indo-pakistani war of 1965 started following the culmination of skirmishes that took place between april 1965 and september 1965 and pakistan's operation gibraltar, which was designed to infiltrate forces into jammu and kashmir to precipitate an insurgency against rule by india. india retaliated by launching a full-scale military attack on west pakistan. the seventeen-day war caused thousands of casualties on both sides and witnessed the largest engagement of armored vehicles and the largest tank battle since world war ii. hostilities between the two countries ended after a united nations-mandated ceasefire was declared following diplomatic intervention by the soviet union and the united states, and the subsequent issuance of the tashkent declaration. the five-week war caused thousands of casualties on both sides. most of the battles were fought by opposing infantry and armoured units, with substantial backing from air forces, and naval operations. it ended in a united nations (un) mandated ceasefire and the subsequent issuance of the tashkent declaration.


=== war of 1971 ===

pakistan, since independence, was geo-politically divided into two major regions, west pakistan and east pakistan. east pakistan was occupied mostly by bengali people. after a pakistani military operation and a genocide on bengalis in december 1971, following a political crisis in east pakistan, the situation soon spiralled out of control in east pakistan and india intervened in favour of the rebelling bengali populace. the conflict, a brief but bloody war, resulted in the independence of east pakistan. in the war, the indian army invaded east pakistan from three sides, while the indian navy used the aircraft carrier ins vikrant (r11) to impose a naval blockade of east pakistan. the war saw the first offensive operations undertaken by the indian navy against an enemy port, when karachi harbour was attacked twice during operation trident (1971) and operation python. these attacks destroyed a significant portion of pakistan's naval strength, whereas no indian ship was lost. the indian navy did, however, lose a single ship, when ins khukri (f149) was torpedoed by a pakistani submarine. 13 days after the invasion of east pakistan, 90,000 pakistani military personnel surrendered to the indian army and the mukti bahini. after the surrender of pakistani forces, east pakistan became the independent nation of bangladesh.


=== kargil war ===

during the winter months of 199899, the indian army vacated its posts at very high peaks in kargil sector in kashmir as it used to do every year. pakistani army intruded across the line of control and occupied the posts. indian army discovered this in may 1999 when the snow thawed. this resulted in intense fighting between indian and pakistani forces, known as the kargil conflict. backed by the indian air force, the indian army regained many of the posts that pakistan had occupied. pakistan later withdrew from the remaining portion under international pressure and high casualties.


=== other territorial claims ===
the relations are locked in other territorial claims such as the siachen glacier and kori creek.


=== water disputes ===
the indus waters treaty governs the rivers that flow from india into pakistan. water is cited as one possible cause for a conflict between the two nations, but to date issues such as the nimoo bazgo project have been resolved through diplomacy.


=== bengal refugee crisis (1949) ===

in 1949, india recorded close to 1 million hindu refugees, who flooded into west bengal and other states from east pakistan (now bangladesh), owing to communal violence, intimidation and repression from authorities. the plight of the refugees outraged hindus and indian nationalists, and the refugee population drained the resources of indian states, which were unable to absorb them. while not ruling out war, prime minister nehru and sardar patel invited liaquat ali khan for talks in delhi. although many indians termed this appeasement, nehru signed a pact with liaquat ali khan that pledged both nations to the protection of minorities and creation of minority commissions. khan and nehru also signed a trade agreement, and committed to resolving bilateral conflicts through peaceful means. steadily, hundreds of thousands of hindus returned to east pakistan, but the thaw in relations did not last long, primarily owing to the kashmir conflict.


=== afghanistan ===

afghanistan and pakistan have had their own historic rivalry over their border, the durand line, which numerous afghan governments have refused to recognise as the border. this has led to strong tensions between the two countries and even military confrontations, resulting in pakistan as victorious. pakistan has long accused afghanistan of harbouring baloch separatist rebels and attempting to sponsor separatist tendencies amongst its pashtun and baloch populations, going as far back as the 1950s. it has been believed that pakistan during the 1970s, then under zulfikar ali bhutto, in retaliation began supporting islamist factions in afghanistan. these factions proved rebellious for the afghan government that was friendly to the soviet union and its south asian ally, india.
the later soviet intervention in afghanistan to prevent further escalation and eventual islamist takeover of the country proved disastrous afterwards. the united states and its allies feared direct soviet involvement in afghanistan and began aiding pakistan's support for the afghan mujaheddin, in hopes of crippling the soviet union. the soviet-afghan war turned out to be a stalemate with heavy casualties on all sides and costly for the soviets. under international agreement, the soviets withdrew. but various afghan factions fought one another and their external supporters, including the soviet union, iran, pakistan and others disagreed on which should be in power.
continued rival proxy support led to the civil war, in which pakistan supported in the taliban, seeking to secure its interests in afghanistan and providing strategic support, while india and afghanistan's other neighbours backed the northern alliance.
after the taliban defeated the northern alliance in much of afghanistan in the afghan civil war (1996-2001), the taliban regime continued to be supported by pakistan  one of the three countries to do so  before the 11 september attacks. india firmly opposed the taliban and criticised pakistan for supporting it. india established its links with the northern alliance as india officially recognised their government, with the united nations. india's relations with afghanistan, pakistan's neighbour, and its increasing presence there has irked pakistan.
the 2008 indian embassy bombing in kabul was a suicide bomb terror attack on the indian embassy in kabul, afghanistan on 7 july 2008 at 8:30 am local time. us intelligence officials suggested that pakistan's isi intelligence agency had planned the attack.
pakistan tried to deny any responsibility,
but united states president george w. bush confronted pakistani prime minister yousuf raza gilani with evidence and warned him that in the case of another such attack he would have to take "serious action".pakistan has been accused by india, afghanistan, the united states, and the united kingdom, of involvement in terrorism in kashmir and afghanistan. in july 2009, former president of pakistan asif ali zardari admitted that the pakistani government had "created and nurtured" terrorist groups to achieve its short-term foreign policy goals. according to an analysis published by saban centre for middle east policy at brookings institution in 2008 pakistan was the world's "most active" state sponsor of terrorism including aiding groups and pakistan has long aided a range of terrorist groups fighting against india in kashmir and is a major sponsor of taliban forces fighting the u.s.-backed government in afghanistan.


=== insurgency in kashmir (1989present) ===

according to some reports published by the council of foreign relations, the pakistan military and the isi have provided covert support to terrorist groups active in kashmir, including the al-qaeda affiliate jaish-e-mohammed. pakistan has denied any involvement in terrorist activities in kashmir, arguing that it only provides political and moral support to the secessionist groups who wish to escape indian rule. many kashmiri militant groups also maintain their headquarters in pakistan-administered kashmir, which is cited as further proof by the indian government.
journalist stephen suleyman schwartz notes that several militant and criminal groups are "backed by senior officers in the pakistani army, the country's isi intelligence establishment and other armed bodies of the state."


==== list of some insurgent attacks ====
insurgents attack on jammu and kashmir state assembly: a car bomb exploded near the jammu and kashmir state assembly on 1 october 2001, killing 27 people on an attack that was blamed on kashmiri separatists. it was one of the most prominent attacks against india apart from on the indian parliament in december 2001. the dead bodies of the terrorists and the data recovered from them revealed that pakistan was solely responsible for the activity.
qasim nagar attack: on 13 july 2003, armed men believed to be a part of the lashkar-e-toiba threw hand grenades at the qasim nagar market in srinagar and then fired on civilians standing nearby killing twenty-seven and injuring many more.[2]
assassination of abdul ghani lone: abdul ghani lone, a prominent all party hurriyat conference leader, was assassinated by an unidentified gunmen during a memorial rally in srinagar. the assassination resulted in wide-scale demonstrations against the indian occupied-forces for failing to provide enough security cover for mr. lone.[3]
20 july 2005 srinagar bombing: a car bomb exploded near an armoured indian army vehicle in the famous church lane area in srinagar killing four indian army personnel, one civilian and the suicide bomber. terrorist group hizbul mujahideen, claimed responsibility for the attack.[4]
budshah chowk attack: a terrorist attack on 29 july 2005 at srinigar's city centre, budshah chowk, killed two and left more than 17 people injured. most of those injured were media journalists.[5]
murder of ghulam nabi lone: on 18 october 2005, a suspected man killed jammu and kashmir's then education minister ghulam nabi lone. no terrorist group claimed responsibility for the attack.[6]
2016 uri attack: a terrorist attack by four heavily armed terrorists on 18 september 2016, near the town of uri in the indian state of jammu and kashmir, killed 18 and left more than 20 people injured. it was reported as "the deadliest attack on security forces in kashmir in two decades".
2019 pulwama attack: on 14 february 2019, a convoy of vehicles carrying security personnel on the jammu srinagar national highway was attacked by a vehicle-bound suicide bomber in lethpora near awantipora, pulwama district, jammu and kashmir, india. the attack resulted in the death of 38 central reserve police force (crpf) personnel and the attacker. the responsibility of the attack was claimed by the pakistan-based islamist militant group jaish-e-mohammed.


=== insurgent activities elsewhere ===
the attack on the indian parliament was by far the most dramatic attack carried out allegedly by pakistani terrorists. india blamed pakistan for carrying out the attacks, an allegation which pakistan strongly denied and one that brought both nations to the brink of a nuclear confrontation in 200102. however, international peace efforts ensured the cooling of tensions between the two nuclear-capable nations.
apart from this, the most notable was the hijacking of indian airlines flight ic 814 en route new delhi from kathmandu, nepal. the plane was hijacked on 24 december 1999 approximately one hour after takeoff and was taken to amritsar airport and then to lahore in pakistan. after refuelling the plane took off for dubai and then finally landed in kandahar, afghanistan. under intense media pressure, new delhi complied with the hijackers' demand and freed maulana masood azhar from its captivity in return for the freedom of the indian passengers on the flight. the decision, however, cost new delhi dearly. maulana, who is believed to be hiding in karachi, later became the leader of jaish-e-mohammed, an organisation which has carried out several terrorist acts against indian security forces in kashmir.[7]on 22 december 2000, a group of terrorists belonging to the lashkar-e-toiba stormed the famous red fort in new delhi. the fort houses an indian military unit and a high-security interrogation cell used both by the central bureau of investigation and the indian army. the terrorists successfully breached the security cover around the red fort and opened fire at the indian military personnel on duty killing two of them on spot. the attack was significant because it was carried out just two days after the declaration of the cease-fire between india and pakistan.[8]in 2002, india claimed again that terrorists from jammu and kashmir were infiltrating into india, a claim denied by pakistan president pervez musharraf, who claimed that such infiltration had stoppedindia's spokesperson for the external affairs ministry did away with pakistan's claim, calling it "terminological inexactitude." only two months later, two kashmiri terrorists belonging to jaish-e-mohammed raided the swami narayan temple complex in ahmedabad, gujarat killing 30 people, including 18 women and five children. the attack was carried out on 25 september 2002, just few days after state elections were held in jammu and kashmir. two identical letters found on both the terrorists claimed that the attack was done in retaliation for the deaths of thousands of muslims during the gujarat riots.[9]two car bombs exploded in south mumbai on 25 august 2003; one near the gateway of india and the other at the famous zaveri bazaar, killing at least 48 and injuring 150 people. though no terrorist group claimed responsibility for the attacks, mumbai police and raw suspected lashkar-e-toiba's hand in the twin blasts.[10]in an unsuccessful attempt, six terrorists belonging to lashkar-e-toiba, stormed the ayodhya ram janmbhomi complex on 5 july 2005. before the terrorists could reach the main disputed site, they were shot down by indian security forces. one hindu worshipper and two policemen were injured during the incident.[11]


==== 2001 indian parliament attack ====

the 2001 indian parliament attack was an attack at the parliament of india in new delhi on 13 december 2001, during which fourteen people, including the five men who attacked the building, were killed. the perpetrators were lashkar-e-taiba (let) and jaish-e-mohammed (jem) terrorists. the attack led to the deaths of  five terrorists, six delhi police personnel, two parliament security service personnel and a gardener, in total 14 and to increased tensions between india and pakistan, resulting in the 200102 indiapakistan standoff.


==== 200102 indiapakistan standoff ====

the 20012002 indiapakistan standoff was a military standoff between india and pakistan that resulted in the massing of troops on either side of the border and along the line of control (loc) in the region of kashmir. this was the first major military standoff between india and pakistan since the kargil war in 1999. the military buildup was initiated by india responding to a 2001 indian parliament attack and the 2001 jammu and kashmir legislative assembly attack. india claimed that the attacks were carried out by two pakistan-based terror groups, the lashkar-e-taiba and jaish-e-mohammad, both of whom india has said are backed by pakistan's isi a charge that pakistan denied. tensions de-escalated following international diplomatic mediation which resulted in the october 2002 withdrawal of indian and pakistani troops from the international border.


==== 2007 samjhauta express bombings ====

the 2007 samjhauta express bombings was a terrorist attack targeted on the samjhauta express train on 18 february. the samjhauta express is an international train that runs from new delhi, india to lahore, pakistan, and is one of two trains to cross the india-pakistan border. at least 68 people were killed, mostly pakistani civilians but also some indian security personnel and civilians.


==== 2008 mumbai attacks ====

the 2008 mumbai attacks by ten pakistani terrorists killed over 173 and wounded 308. the sole surviving gunman ajmal kasab who was arrested during the attacks was found to be a pakistani national. this fact was acknowledged by pakistani authorities. in may 2010, an indian court convicted him on four counts of murder, waging war against india, conspiracy and terrorism offences, and sentenced him to death.india blamed the lashkar-e-taiba, a pakistan-based militant group, for planning and executing the attacks. indian officials demanded pakistan extradite suspects for trial. they also said that, given the sophistication of the attacks, the perpetrators "must have had the support of some official agencies in pakistan". in july 2009 pakistani authorities confirmed that let plotted and financed the attacks from let camps in karachi and thatta. in november 2009, pakistani authorities charged seven men they had arrested earlier, of planning and executing the assault.on 9 april 2015, the foremost ringleader of the attacks, zakiur rehman lakhvi was granted bail against surety bonds of 200,000 (us$1,200) in pakistan.the indian intelligence agency raw is claimed to be working in cover to malign pakistan and train & support insurgents for balochistan conflict.


== weapons of mass destruction ==

india has a long history of development of nuclear weapons. origins of india's nuclear program dates back to 1944, when started its nuclear program soon after its independence. in the 1940s1960s, india's nuclear program slowly matured towards militarisation and expanded the nuclear power infrastructure throughout the country. decisions on the development of nuclear weapons were made by indian political leaders after the chinese invasion and territorial annexation of northern india. in 1967, india's nuclear program was aimed at the development of nuclear weapons, with indira gandhi carefully overseeing the development of weapons. in 1971, india gained military and political momentum over pakistan, after a successful military campaign against pakistan. starting preparations for a nuclear test in 1972, india finally exploded its first nuclear bomb in pokhran test range, codename smiling buddha, in 1974. during the 1980s90s, india began development of space and nuclear rockets, which marked pakistan's efforts to engage in the space race with india. pakistan's own program developed space and nuclear missiles and began unmanned flight tests of its space vehicles in the mid-1990s, which continues in the present.after the defeat in the indo-pakistani war of 1971, pakistan launched its own nuclear bomb program in 1972, and accelerated its efforts in 1974, after india exploded its first nuclear bomb in pokhran test range, codename smiling buddha. this large-scale nuclear bomb program was directly in response to india's nuclear program. in 1983, pakistan achieved a major milestone in its efforts after it covertly performed a series of non-fission tests, codename kirana-i. no official announcements of such cold tests were made by pakistan government. over the next several years, pakistan expanded and modernised nuclear power projects around the country to supply its electricity sector and to provide back-up support and benefit to its national economy. in 1988, a mutual understanding was reached between the two countries in which each pledged not to attack nuclear facilities. agreements on cultural exchanges and civil aviation were also initiated, also in 1988. finally, in 1998, india exploded its second nuclear test (see: pokhran-ii) which invited pakistan to follow the latter's step and performed its own atomic tests (see:chagai-i and chagai-ii).


=== consequences of using mass destruction weapons ===
pakistan and india are estimated to have nuclear arsenals of between 100 and 300 warheads each. the use of nuclear warheads by nuclear-armed countries could result in a regional, if not a global catastrophe. however, india and pakistan are of particular concern when it comes to nuclear weapons because of their long history of military conflicts including recent attacks, lack of success in settling territorial disputes, heavily populated urban areas, and continuing rapid expansion of their respective nuclear stockpiles. by 2025, pakistan and india could have 400 to 500 nuclear warheads, with yields ranging from approximately 50 kilotons to a few hundred kilotons. if india uses 100 nuclear warheads and pakistan utilizes 150 nuclear weapons, approximately 100 to 150 million civilians could be killed, and nuclear-fueled fires could emit about 20 to 40 teragram (tg) of black carbon into the atmosphere, depending on the yield of the nuclear weapons. within weeks, the smoke will climb into the upper atmosphere. the sunlight on the surface of the earth would decrease by approximately 20 to 30 percent, lowering the global temperature by approximately 3 to 5 degrees celsius and annual rainfall would decrease by approximately 20 to 35 percent, with greater geographical disruptions. net primary production will drops by approximately 20 to 40 percent on land and in the seas, posing a threat of widespread famine and high regional collateral deaths. recovering from this catastrophe will take more than ten years. even a small-scale nuclear conflict has catastrophic global consequences.


=== how to prevent indo-pakistani nuclear war ===
following the indian defense minister's statement that india may rescind its current promise to only use strategic weapons in response to a nuclear strike, the tensions between india and pakistan are extremely high. the united states has designated south asia as a hotbed of terrorism and religious radicalism, and hence has a responsibility in maintaining regional security, avoiding strategic warheads expansion, and averting a nuclear conflict between pakistan and india. to avoid a nuclear war between pakistan and india, both countries must communicate openly and discuss the kashmir problem without threatening each other. outside of times of conflict, parliamentary hearings should be maintained, and both parties should do better to justify the socioeconomic advantages of reconciliation. india would have to see the value of a larger foreign position in facilitating the peace process and progress in improving people's lives in kashmir. pakistan will have to keep its promises to stop assisting militants in kashmir and to stop terrorizing the ceasefire line.due to high tensions between india and pakistan, countries such as china, russia, and the united states might need to take severe actions to prevent the nuclear war. if the nuclear war between india and pakistan is inevitable, the united states should use its interceptors and bombers to destroy the incoming missiles crossing the india-pakistan border in either direction. nuclear warfare between india and pakistan cannot be allowed to play itself out because of its consequences that go beyond the two countries. with the united states itself being a nuclear superpower, it has more of an influence when it comes to moments of intervention and beyond. the nuclear conflict between india and pakistan should be stopped because it has far-reaching regional and global consequences.


== talks and other confidence building measures ==
after the 1971 war, pakistan and india made slow progress towards the normalisation of relations. in july 1972, indian prime minister indira gandhi and pakistani president zulfikar ali bhutto met in the indian hill station of shimla. they signed the shimla agreement, by which india would return all pakistani personnel (over 90,000) and captured territory in the west, and the two countries would "settle their differences by peaceful means through bilateral negotiations." diplomatic and trade relations were also re-established in 1976.


=== 1990s ===
in 1997, high-level indo-pakistan talks resumed after a three-year pause. the prime ministers of pakistan and india met twice and the foreign secretaries conducted three rounds of talks. in june 1997, the foreign secretaries identified eight "outstanding issues" around which continuing talks would be focused. the conflict over the status of kashmir, (referred by india as jammu and kashmir), an issue since independence, remains the major stumbling block in their dialogue. india maintains that the entire former princely state is an integral part of the indian union, while pakistan insists that un resolutions calling for self-determination of the people of the state/province must be taken into account. it however refuses to abide by the previous part of the resolution, which calls for it to vacate all territories occupied.
in september 1997, the talks broke down over the structure of how to deal with the issues of kashmir, and peace and security. pakistan advocated that the issues be treated by separate working groups. india responded that the two issues be taken up along with six others on a simultaneous basis.
attempts to restart dialogue between the two nations were given a major boost by the february 1999 meeting of both prime ministers in lahore and their signing of three agreements.
a subsequent military coup in pakistan that overturned the democratically elected nawaz sharif government in october of the same year also proved a setback to relations.


=== 2000s ===
in 2001, a summit was called in agra; pakistani president pervez musharraf turned up to meet indian prime minister atal behari vajpayee. the talks fell through.
on 20 june 2004, with a new government in place in india, both countries agreed to extend a nuclear testing ban and to set up a hotline between their foreign secretaries aimed at preventing misunderstandings that might lead to a nuclear war.baglihar dam issue was a new issue raised by pakistan in 2005.

after dr. manmohan singh become prime minister of india in may 2004, the punjab provincial government declared it would develop gah, his place of birth, as a model village in his honour and name a school after him. there is also a village in india named pakistan, despite occasional pressure over the years to change its name the villagers have resisted. violent activities in the region declined in 2004. there are two main reasons for this: warming of relations between new delhi and islamabad which consequently lead to a ceasefire between the two countries in 2003 and the fencing of the line of control being carried out by the indian army. moreover, coming under intense international pressure, islamabad was compelled to take action against the militants' training camps on its territory. in 2004, the two countries also agreed upon decreasing the number of troops present in the region.
under pressure, kashmiri militant organisations made an offer for talks and negotiations with new delhi, which india welcomed.
india's border security force blamed the pakistani military for providing cover-fire for the terrorists whenever they infiltrated into indian territory from pakistan. pakistan in turn has also blamed india for providing support to terrorist organisations operating in pakistan such as the bla.
in 2005, pakistan's information minister, sheikh rashid, was alleged to have run a terrorist training camp in 1990 in n.w. frontier, pakistan. the pakistani government dismissed the charges against its minister as an attempt to hamper the ongoing peace process between the two neighbours.
both india and pakistan have launched several mutual confidence-building measures (cbms) to ease tensions between the two. these include more high-level talks, easing visa restrictions, and restarting of cricket matches between the two. the new bus service between srinagar and muzaffarabad has also helped bring the two sides closer. pakistan and india have also decided to co-operate on economic fronts.
some improvements in the relations are seen with the re-opening of a series of transportation networks near the indiapakistan border, with the most important being bus routes and railway lines.
a major clash between indian security forces and militants occurred when a group of insurgents tried to infiltrate into kashmir from pakistan in july 2005. the same month also saw a kashmiri militant attack on ayodhya and srinagar. however, these developments had little impact on the peace process.
an indian man held in pakistani prisons since 1975 as an accused spy walked across the border to freedom 3 march 2008, an unconditional release that pakistan said was done to improve relations between the two countries.in 2006, a "friends without borders" scheme began with the help of two british tourists. the idea was that indian and pakistani children would make pen pals and write friendly letters to each other. the idea was so successful in both countries that the organisation found it "impossible to keep up". the world's largest love letter was recently sent from india to pakistan.


=== 2010s ===
in december 2010, several pakistani newspapers published stories about india's leadership and relationship with militants in pakistan that the papers claimed were found in the united states diplomatic cables leak.  a british newspaper, the guardian, which had the wikileaks cables in its possession reviewed the cables and concluded that the pakistani claims were "not accurate" and that "wikileaks [was] being exploited for propaganda purposes."on 10 february 2011, india agreed to resume talks with pakistan which were suspended after 26/11 mumbai attacks. india had put on hold all the diplomatic relations saying it will only continue if pakistan will act against the accused of mumbai attacks.
on 13 april 2012, following a thaw in relations whereby india gained mfn status in the country, india announced the removal of restrictions on fdi investment from pakistan to india.the foreign minister of pakistan on 11 july 2012, stated in phnom penh that her country is willing to resolve some of the disputes like, sir creek and siachen on the basis of agreements reached in past.on 7 september 2012, indian external affairs minister would pay 3-day visit to pakistan to review the progress of bilateral dialogue with his pakistani counterpart.in august 2019, following the approval of the jammu and kashmir reorganisation bill in the indian parliament, which revoked the special status of jammu and kashmir, further tension was brought between the two countries, with pakistan downgrading their diplomatic ties, closing its airspace, and suspending bilateral trade with india.


=== 2020s ===
on 25 february 2021, india and pakistan issued a joint statement indicating that both sides agreed to stop firing at each other at the disputed line of control border in kashmir.


== response to natural calamities ==


=== 2001 gujarat earthquake in india ===
in response to the 2001 gujarat earthquake, pakistani president pervez mushrraf sent a plane load of relief supplies from islamabad to ahmedabad. they carried 200 tents and more than 2,000 blankets. furthermore, the president called indian pm to express his 'sympathy' over the loss from the earthquake.


=== 2005 earthquake in pakistan ===
india offered generous aid to pakistan in response to the 2005 kashmir earthquake on 8 october. indian and pakistani high commissioners consulted with one another regarding cooperation in relief work. india sent 25 tonnes of relief material to pakistan including food, blankets and medicine. large indian companies such as infosys offered aid up to $226,000. on 12 october, an ilyushin-76 cargo plane ferried across seven truckloads (about 82 tons) of army medicines, 15,000 blankets and 50 tents and returned to new delhi. a senior air force official also stated that they had been asked by the indian government to be ready to fly out another similar consignment. on 14 october, india dispatched the second consignment of relief material to pakistan, by train through the wagah border. the consignment included 5,000 blankets, 370 tents, 5 tons of plastic sheets and 12 tons of medicine. a third consignment of medicine and relief material was also sent shortly afterwards by train. india also pledged $25 million as aid to pakistan.india opened the first of three points at chakan da bagh, in poonch, on the line of control between india and pakistan for the 2005 kashmir earthquake relief work. such generous gestures signalled a new era of confidence, friendliness and cooperation between both india and pakistan.


== fugitives ==
india has accused some of the most wanted indian fugitives, such as dawood ibrahim, of having a presence in pakistan. on 11 may 2011, india released a list of 50 "most wanted fugitives" hiding in pakistan. this was to tactically pressure pakistan after the killing of osama bin laden in his compound in abbottabad.after two errors in the list received publicity, the central bureau of investigation removed it from their website pending a review. after this incident the pakistani interior ministry rejected the list of 50 most wanted men forwarded by india to islamabad, saying it should first probe if those named in the list were even living in the country.


== social relations ==


=== cultural links ===
india and pakistan, particularly northern india and eastern pakistan, to some degree have similar cultures, cuisines and languages due to common indo-aryan heritage which span through the two countries and throughout much of the northern subcontinent which also underpin the historical ties between the two. pakistani singers, musicians, comedians and entertainers have enjoyed widespread popularity in india, with many achieving overnight fame in the indian film industry bollywood. likewise, indian music and film are very popular in pakistan. being located in the northernmost region of the south asia, pakistan's culture is somewhat similar to that of north india, especially the northwest.
the punjab region was split into punjab, pakistan and punjab, india following the independence and partition of the two countries in 1947. the punjabi people are today the largest ethnic group in pakistan and also an important ethnic group of northern india. the founder of sikhism was born in the modern-day pakistani punjab province, in the city of nankana sahib. each year, millions of indian sikh pilgrims cross over to visit holy sikh sites in nankana sahib. the sindhi people are the native ethnic group of the pakistani province of sindh. many hindu sindhis migrated to india in 1947, making the country home to a sizeable sindhi community. in addition, the millions of muslims who migrated from india to the newly created pakistan during independence came to be known as the muhajir people; they are settled predominantly in karachi and still maintain family links in india.
relations between pakistan and india have also resumed through platforms such as media and communications. aman ki asha is a joint venture and campaign between the times of india and the jang group calling for mutual peace and development of diplomatic and cultural relations.


=== geographic links ===

the indo-pakistani border is the official international boundary that demarcates the indian states of punjab, rajasthan and gujarat from the pakistani provinces of punjab and sindh. the wagah border is the only road crossing between india and pakistan and lies on the famous grand trunk road, connecting lahore, pakistan with amritsar, india. each evening, the wagah border ceremony takes place at the wagah border in which the flags are lowered and guards on both sides make a pompous military display and exchange handshakes.


=== linguistic ties ===
hindustani is the linga franca of north india and pakistan, as well as the official language of both countries, under the standard registers hindi and urdu, respectively. standard urdu is mutually intelligible with standard hindi. hindustani is also widely understood and used as a lingua franca amongst south asians including sri lankans, nepalis and bangladeshis, and is the language of bollywood, which is enjoyed throughout much of the subcontinent.
apart from hindustani, india and pakistan also share a distribution of the punjabi language (written in the gurmukhi script in indian punjab, and the shahmukhi script in pakistani punjab), kashmiri language and sindhi language, mainly due to population exchange. these languages belong to a common indo-aryan family that are spoken in countries across the subcontinent.


=== matrimonial ties ===
some indian and pakistani people marry across the border at instances. many indians and pakistanis in the diaspora, especially in the united states, intermarry, as there are large cultural similarities between the two countries respectively.in april 2010 a high-profile pakistani cricketer, shoaib malik married the indian tennis star sania mirza. the wedding received much media attention and was said to transfix both india and pakistan.


=== sporting ties ===

cricket and hockey matches between the two (as well as other sports to a lesser degree such as those of the saarc games) have often been political in nature. during the soviet invasion of afghanistan general zia-ul haq travelled to india for a bout of "cricket diplomacy" to keep india from supporting the soviets by opening another front. pervez musharaff also tried to do the same more than a decade later but to no avail.
in tennis, rohan bopanna of india and aisam-ul-haq qureshi of pakistan have formed a successful duo and have been dubbed as the "indo-pak express."


=== diasporic relations ===
the large size of the indian diaspora and pakistani diaspora in many different countries throughout the world has created strong diasporic relations.
british indians and british pakistanis, the largest and second-largest ethnic minorities living in the united kingdom respectively, are said to have friendly relations with one another. it is quite common for a "little india" and a "little pakistan" to co-exist in south asian ethnic enclaves in overseas countries. there are various cities such as birmingham, blackburn and manchester where british indians and british pakistanis live alongside each other in peace and harmony. both indians and pakistanis living in the uk fit under the category of british asian. the uk is also home to the pakistan & india friendship forum. in the united states, indians and pakistanis are classified under the south asian american category and share many cultural traits. in the us, intermarriage between indians and pakistanis is common.the british mep sajjad karim is of pakistani origin. he is a member of the european parliament friends of india group, karim was also responsible for opening up europe to free trade with india. he narrowly escaped the mumbai attacks at hotel taj in november 2008. despite the atrocity, karim does not wish the remaining killer ajmal kasab to be sentenced to death. he said: "i believe he had a fair and transparent trial and i support the guilty verdict. but i am not a supporter of capital punishment. i believe he should be given a life sentence, but that life should mean life."


=== trade links ===
trade across direct routes has been curtailed formally, so the bulk of india-pakistan trade is routed through dubai.


== see also ==


=== foreign relations ===
foreign relations of india
foreign relations of pakistan
south asian association for regional cooperation (saarc)


=== history ===
history of india
history of the republic of india
history of pakistan
history of the kashmir conflict


=== human rights ===
human rights in india
human rights in pakistan
persecution of hindus
persecution of muslims


=== cultural issues ===
hindi-urdu controversy
anti-pakistan sentiment
indophobia


=== terrorism and state disputes ===
indo-pakistani wars
201415 indiapakistan border skirmishes
2013 indiapakistan border skirmishes
insurgency in jammu and kashmir
peacebuilding in jammu and kashmir
balochistan conflict
patriotic hacking
bleed india with a thousand cuts


=== sports ===
india-pakistan cricket rivalry
india-pakistan field hockey rivalry


== references ==


== bibliography ==
ahmad, ishtiaq; ebert, hannes (2015), "breaking the equilibrium? new leaders and old structures in the india-pakistan rivalry", asian affairs: an american review, 42: 4675, doi:10.1080/00927678.2015.999518, s2cid 153809052.
ahmed, mutahir (1998), "confidencebuilding measures between pakistan and india: an argument for change", contemporary south asia, 7 (2): 137145, doi:10.1080/09584939808719835.
batcher, robert t. (2004), "the consequences of an indo-pakistani nuclear war1", international studies review, 6 (4): 135162, doi:10.1111/j.1521-9488.2004.00453.x.
bisht, rachna (15 august 2015), 1965: stories from the second indo-pakistan war, penguin uk, p. 60, isbn 978-93-5214-129-6
ganguly, sumit; wagner, r harrison (2004), "india and pakistan: bargaining in the shadow of nuclear war", journal of strategic studies, 27 (3): 479507, doi:10.1080/1362369042000282994, s2cid 155000054.
ganguly, sumit (2020), india, pakistan, and bangladesh: civil-military relations, oxford: oxford university press.
higgins, david r. (20 january 2016), m48 patton vs centurion: indo-pakistan war 1965, osprey publishing, p. 103, isbn 978-1-4728-1094-6
khan, zafar (2019), "balancing and stabilizing south asia: challenges and opportunities for sustainable peace and stability", international journal of conflict management, 30 (5): 589614, doi:10.1108/ijcma-08-2018-0093.
lumby, e.w.r. (1954), the transfer of power in india, 19451947, london: george allen and unwin.
metcalf, barbara d.; metcalf, thomas r. (2006), a concise history of india (2nd ed.), cambridge university press, isbn 978-0-521-68225-1
zdoan, mutlu; robock, alan; kucharik, christopher j. (2013), "impacts of a nuclear war in south asia on soybean and maize production in the midwest united states", climatic change, 116 (2): 373387, doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0518-1, s2cid 2837628.
pye, lucian w. (2000), "reviewed work: kashmir in conflict: india, pakistan, and the unfinished war, victoria schofield", foreign affairs, 79 (6): 190191, doi:10.2307/20050024, jstor 20050024.
shamim, syed jazib (2018), nuclear proliferation in south asia towards world war iii, doi:10.2139/ssrn.3111513.
singh, p. k. (2015), "the india-pakistan nuclear dyad and regional nuclear dynamics", asia policy, 19 (19): 3744, doi:10.1353/asp.2015.0019, jstor 24905298, s2cid 153779296.
toon, owen b.; bardeen, charles g.; robock, alan; xia, lili; kristensen, hans; mckinzie, matthew; peterson, r. j.; harrison, cheryl s.; lovenduski, nicole s.; turco, richard p. (2019), "rapidly expanding nuclear arsenals in pakistan and india portend regional and global catastrophe", science advances, 5 (10): eaay5478, doi:10.1126/sciadv.aay5478, pmc 6774726, pmid 31616796.


== further reading ==
budania, rajpal, "india's pakistan policy: a study in the context of security," south asian studies, vol.30:2,1995.
burke, s.m.,mainsprings of indian and pakistani foreign policies, minneapolis, university of minnesota, 1974.
brines russel, the indo-pakistan conflict, london, pall mall press, 1968.
thomas powers, "the war without end" (review of steve coll, directorate s:  the cia and america's secret wars in afghanistan and pakistan, penguin, 2018, 757 pp.), the new york review of books, vol. lxv, no. 7 (19 april 2018), pp. 4243.  "forty-plus years after our failure in vietnam, the united states is again fighting an endless war in a faraway place against a culture and a people we don't understand for political reasons that make sense in washington, but nowhere else."  (p. 43.)  pakistan's support of afghanistan's taliban guerrillas, including provision of sanctuary, relates to pakistan's hope of acquiring india's kashmir.  (p. 42.)


== external links ==
aman ki asha - a peace initiative by jang group, pakistan & times of india
india-pakistan trade
building a bridge of friendship
a long distance relationship
nuclear proliferation in india and pakistan from the dean peter krogh foreign affairs digital archives