indian rupee is a 2011 indian malayalam satirical film written and directed by ranjith balakrishnan, and produced by august cinema. the film stars prithviraj sukumaran, thilakan, tini tom and jagathy sreekumar in significant roles.
the film released on 6 october 2011, to a positive response from critics. it received numerous accolades including national film award for best feature film in malayalam and kerala state film award for best film.


== plot ==
indian rupee is a satirical dig on making quick money without sweating it out and youth blindly follows on such examples. jayaprakash or jp (prithviraj sukumaran) is a small-time real estate dealer based in calicut, who dreams of making it big someday. jp is a school drop-out and in love with his cousin beena (rima kallingal) who is a doctor, which is unknown to her parents. jp along with his partner ch (tini tom) is scouting for land deals. he is working under a senior agent raayin(mamukoya) but wishes to break free as soon as possible. he believes that his fortunes are up for a change, when achutha menon (thilakan), an old widower approaches him to sell off his first son's land assets, the deal never happens. achutha menon stays with jp and ch, he became a part of their life. things start happening in a fantastic way for jp, soon after. jp manages to earn a decent fortune after some smart moves and tricks, but he learns some valuable lessons by the end of the process. the person whom jp tried to cheat, "golden" pappan (jagathy sreekumar), helps him out in this. jayaprakash later vows to make money from an honest day's work, instead of through tricky deals.


== cast ==

the film featured cameo appearances from joju george, asif ali, fahadh faasil, and augustine.


== soundtrack ==

all music is composed by shahabaz aman.the audio release function was held at puliyarmala krishna gowdar hall, kalpetta, wayanad on 23 august 2011. the song ee puzhayum sandhyakalum from the film was the last song of the veteran poet-cum-lyricist mullanezhi, who died soon after the film was released.


== reception ==
the film opened to positive reviews from critics. reviewers have praised ranjith balakrishnan in presenting such an "oft-told story" in such a refreshing way.deccan chronicle said, "touching a thriving social chord of life, indian rupee is a movie minus drama packed with the intricacies of life's realities." rediff.com observed  "indian rupee should be seen by people who think that good stories have vanished from films. ranjith has just told the story of contemporary kerala society in a most interesting way." nowrunning.com commented: "the details are downright gripping, the asides sparkling and the setups almost surreal, so much so that indian rupee hops straight into the year's must-see movies list and scrambles right up to the top". the site added that it is as easily one of the best performances from prithviraj, and says that "indian rupee would as much be remembered for prithviraj the actor, as the actor would be remembered for the film."sify.com wrote -"though it is a bit too melodramatic and even preachy at times, indian rupee is easily one of the finest films of the year. it has honesty written all over it and such efforts need to be seen and appreciated by the audience."


== box office ==
the film has taken  2.5 crore as distributor's share from theatres.


== accolades ==
national film awards (2011)best feature film in malayalamkerala state film awards (2011)best filmfilmfare awards southbest supporting actor - malayalam - thilakan
best playback singer (male) - malayalam - "ee puzhayum" - vijay yesudasasianet film awardsbest director  ranjith balakrishnan


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
indian rupee at imdb