inquilaab (lit.'revolution') is a 1984 bollywood hindi political thriller film starring amitabh bachchan, sridevi in lead roles, along with utpal dutt, kader khan, ranjeet, shakti kapoor and others in supporting roles. nirupa roy had also an appearance as the mother of the character, played by amitabh bachchan in one scene of the movie. the music was composed by laxmikant-pyarelal. it is a remake of kannada film chakravyuha (1983).


== plot ==
street-wise and poor, amarnath (amitabh bachchan) makes a  living selling cinema tickets and fast-food snacks (bhel puri) outside cinema halls. he had done m. a. in political science and had a good academic record, but could not find any job. he is taken under the wing of a politician and chair of the "garibon ki party", shankar narayan (kader khan), who insist that amarnath join his party, but he refused and wished to have a job. shankar, using his influence, arranged some livings for him because he had saved him from a chaotic public during his speech. thus, he returned the favour. amarnath was allowed to join the police academy, and returns as a police inspector. after completing his training, he comes back to shankar to thank him and to seek his blessings. amarnath believes that it is he who is responsible for his achievements, but shankar in fact using him as a pawn in the so-called "chess of politics". he, during his first duty while catching a thug accidentally encounters with asha (sridevi), the only daughter of multi-millionaire businessman, seetaram (utpal dutt) and later saved her from gangsters who are trying to rape her, asha falls in love with amarnath later. shankar, who wants to have fame, wanted to have a chaos in the country, so that he can criticize government and can gain the people's support. he hires a very dangerous terrorist name anil raj (tiger prabhakar). when amarnath successfully apprehends and kills anil raj, he is promoted as the assistant commissioner of police. asha shares his joy, and soon both get married, seetaram does not want to marry her daughter with amarnath at first, but later is convinced by shankar. soon they are informed that they will soon be proud parents. seetaram tricks amar and trapped him by giving him a briefcase to hand over to his new partner in delhi, who is nothing but a smuggler by the name koya koya atachi (shakti kapoor). both shankar and seetaram use amarnath as a pawn by blackmailing him, by the picture which was taken when amarnath was giving the briefcase to an international smuggler. chief commissioner of mumbai police (iftekhar) was informed about what amarnath had done, so he ordered another inspector pratap (shafi inamdar) to investigate this case and follow amarnath wherever he goes. amarnath was ordered by seetaram to retrieve diamonds from koya koya atachi and also save him from police. amarnath does his job but also kills him, and gets immensely popular with the public. his colleague inspector issued a warrant to search amarnath's house because he knows that amarnath has diamonds which he retrieved from koya koya atachi, but he failed to find the diamonds because amar hid them inside his fake bandages. it is revealed to pregnant asha that her husband was not a true patriot and an honest officer who he claims to be, but is a pawn in the hands of skilled politicians, who have been using him as their hit-man. amar tries to convince asha otherwise, but failed. asha gave birth to amarnath's child, but does not allow him to touch her new born child. amarnath, who is deeply heart broken, soon resigns from the police force, meanwhile shankar resigns and asks amarnath to be the new chairman of his political party, which he accepts. then amarnath started the campaign of upcoming elections, by following on the advice and tricks of shankar. as people love and support amarnath, as a result, his party gains the majority in elections, shankar's trick works and he is ready to use him as the chief minister so that they can carry on with their nefarious activities. asha tries to prevent amarnath from influencing their newborn son, and from attaining power, but fails. amarnath went to decide his new cabinet ministers in the party's closed meeting. amarnath traps them and kills every person present in the meeting. when asha arrived, she is shocked and ashamed to see the real intentions of her husband, they greet each other happily, but soon amarnath is arrested because of his act, and all the people became furious. amarnath then speaks to all of them that, he had murdered all the corrupt politicians, bringing "inquilaab" (revolution).


== cast ==
amitabh bachchan as inspector / acp / cm amarnath
sridevi as asha
utpal dutt as seetaram
kader khan as shankar narayan
shakti kapoor as koya koya atachi
ranjeet as bhupati / b. pathi
nirupa roy as amarnath's mother
purnima as amarnath's aunty
iftekhar as police commissioner
shafi inamdar as inspector pratap
jagdish raj as ig shamsher singh
t. p. jain as victor jairaj
c. s. dubey as saraswati prasad
pinchoo kapoor as vishwanath
ram mohan as kamleshswar rao
viju khote as black marketer (bhupati's associate)
tiger prabhakar as anil raj


== reception ==
despite completing a silver jubilee, the film was an above average earner.


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
inquilaab at imdb