inspiration is a 1931 american pre-code metro-goldwyn-mayer film adapted from the alphonse daudet short novel sappho (1884). the film was adapted by gene markey, directed by clarence brown and produced by irving thalberg. the cinematography was by william h. daniels, the art direction by cedric gibbons and the costume design by adrian.the film features greta garbo playing yvonne valbret, an artist's model and kept woman. robert montgomery, lewis stone and marjorie rambeau co-starred. the film is a romantic melodrama that portrays a parisian belle whose past returns to haunt her. (inspiration is the only film in which garbo played opposite montgomery.)according to the critics, garbo played her role easily and convincingly, contributing sparkling bits of light comedy, and making the awkward dialogue believable. she illuminates every scene, shining in her different styles of coiffure and striking costumes.


== plot ==

yvonne valbret (garbo) is a parisian kept woman who poses as an artist's model. she falls in love with a young student of foreign diplomacy, andr montell, played by robert montgomery. when andr learns of her past and her multiple lovers, he leaves her. but finding yvonne living in poverty when their paths cross again, he pays for her to live in his country cottage outside paris and they engage in a platonic relationship. he soon reveals his intent to marry another woman as yvonne begs him not to desert her. andr eventually realizes he loves yvonne and decides to choose love over career. when he comes to the cottage to tell her, he is met by one of yvonne's old lovers pleading with her to return to him. she immediately decides to marry andr, but fearing their relationship will ruin his career, she chooses her old amour and writes andr a farewell note while he is sleeping.


== cast ==
greta garbo as yvonne valbret
robert montgomery as andre montell
lewis stone as raymond delval
marjorie rambeau as lulu
judith vosselli as odette
beryl mercer as marthe, yvonne's maid
john miljan as henry coutant, the sculptor
edwin maxwell as uncle julian montell
oscar apfel as m. vignaud
joan marsh as madeleine dorety
zelda sears as aunt pauline
karen morley as liane latour
gwen lee as gaby
paul mcallister as jouvet
arthur hoyt as gavarni
richard tucker as galand


== references ==


== further reading ==
mark a. vieira. greta garbo: a cinematic legacy. new york: harry n. abrams, 2005; isbn 0-8109-5897-x


== external links ==
inspiration at imdb
inspiration at allmovie
film information at garbo forever