ip man (chinese: ) is a 2008 hong kong biographical martial arts film based on the life of ip man, a grandmaster of the martial art wing chun and teacher of bruce lee. the film focuses on events in ip's life that supposedly took place in the city of foshan during the sino-japanese war. the film was directed by wilson yip, and stars donnie yen as ip man, with martial arts choreography by sammo hung. the supporting cast includes simon yam, lynn hung, lam ka-tung, xing yu, hiroyuki ikeuchi and tenma shibuya. it is a co-production between china and hong kong. it is the last film to be distributed by mandarin films.
ip man is the first film in the ip man film series. it premiered in beijing on 10 december 2008, and was released theatrically in hong kong on 19 december 2008, receiving widespread acclaim from critics and audiences. before the film's release, raymond wong announced that there would be a sequel; a second installment titled ip man 2, was released in april 2010, a third installment titled ip man 3 was released in 2015, and ip man 4: the finale was released in 2019. ip man grossed over us$21 million worldwide, despite not being released in north america and most of europe. following its success, the film was nominated for 12 hong kong film awards, winning awards for best film and best action choreography.


== plot ==
in 1935, foshan is a hub of southern chinese martial arts, where various schools actively recruit disciples and compete against each other. although the wing chun master ip man is the most skilled martial artist in foshan, he is unassuming and maintains a low profile. he is respected by other masters for the humbleness he displays in friendly, closed-door competitions.
one day, a troublemaker named yuan tries to rescue his kite from ip man's tree and witnesses ip defeat fellow master liu in a friendly sparring match. yuan spreads the news all over foshan. his brother lin, a disciple of master liu, pulls his pants down in public to show yuan that some secrets need to be kept private. embarrassed, yuan disappears into the crowd.
jin shanzhao, a rude but highly skilled northern chinese martial arts master, challenges all the masters in foshan to duels, which he easily wins. ip's reputation is further enhanced when he defeats jin, thus upholding the regional pride of fellow southern stylists and others in foshan. the young men in foshan beg ip to take them as disciples, but ip turns them down.
during the second sino-japanese war, the imperial japanese army confiscates ip's house and repurposes it into their foshan military headquarters. ip and his family lose their wealth and are forced to move into a decrepit apartment. desperate to support his family, ip finds work at a coal mine alongside lin. lin regrets humiliating yuan but his efforts to find his brother and gift him a small metal tin have proved futile.
general miura, a japanese karate master, establishes an arena where chinese martial artists compete with his military trainees for the prize of a bag of rice. li zhao, a former police officer and ip's acquaintance, now works as an interpreter for the japanese army. he offers the martial artists working at the coal mine the chance to earn a bag of rice for every match they win. lin disappears shortly after his fight, and ip agrees to participate in order to find out what happened to his friend.
ip watches master liu defeat one of miura's karateka. liu then requests to fight three at once for more bags of rice, though he loses the match. when liu attempts to collect his winning bag of rice from the first match, miura's second-in-command, colonel sato, shoots and kills him. miura points sato's own gun to his head and threatens to personally execute him if he fires in the dojo again.
after witnessing liu's execution, ip deduces that lin was beaten and killed after his earlier fight against miura. enraged, ip demands a match with ten karateka at once. despite having not practiced wing chun since the japanese occupied foshan, he mercilessly defeats them all, showing no restraint that he exhibited in his earlier matches with other masters. his skill arouses the interest of miura, who wants to learn more about ip and watch him fight again. ip collects liu's bag of rice and gifts it to his surviving family.
ip visits his friend, chow ching-chuen, who owns and runs a cotton mill in foshan. one day, chow's son rushes to ip and tells him that a bandit gang led by jin is harassing the workers and trying to extort money from them. ip finally agrees to teach others and trains the workers in wing chun for self-defense.
when ip does not return to the arena, miura grows impatient and sends sato, along with several soldiers, to track ip down. after overpowering them single-handedly, ip and his family flee their apartment and hide in li's house. when the bandits return to the cotton mill, the workers are able to fight and stall them long enough for ip to arrive. he beats jin by hitting his right ear with a wooden pole and deafening it; ip warns jin to stay away from the workers. ip confronts yuan outside the mill for his participation in jin's gang and tells him of his brother lin's fate. he gifts yuan the tin, which contains his folded up kite. yuan leaves jin's gang and joins the workers in resisting the japanese.
one of the gang members inform about ip to the japanese army. they soon raid the mill and though li suggests him not to go to the mill, ip arrives there to save everyone. as ip is being taken prisoner, he asks chow to take his wife and son to hong kong for protection. miura tells ip his life will be spared if he agrees to instruct the japanese soldiers in chinese martial arts. ip refuses and challenges miura to a match. miura accepts because of his love for martial arts and to avoid humiliating the japanese people. sato secretly threatens ip with death if he does not throw the match. at first, the two fighters seem equally matched. ip eventually overwhelms miura, inflicting a severe beating through an impeccable defense and relentless blows.
the chinese crowd cheers for ip, who sees his wife and child returning with chow. just then, sato shoots ip in the shoulder, causing him to fall to the ground. this act incites the chinese crowd, who quickly overwhelm the japanese soldiers. during the scuffle, li kills sato with the latter's own gun. ip is taken away by chow and yuan amid the chaos.
a closing onscreen text reveals that ip survived and has escaped with his family to hong kong with chow's help in 1949. there, ip establishes a wing chun school where his students, including bruce lee, came to learn martial arts from him.


== cast ==
donnie yen as ip man, a sole practitioner of the martial art wing chun.
lynn hung as cheung wing-sing, ip man's wife.
hiroyuki ikeuchi as general miura (japanese:  , rikugun-taish miura/; snp jingjn), a japanese general and karate expert.
tenma shibuya as colonel sato (japanese:  ,  rikugun-taisa sat/; zutng shngxio), a japanese colonel and miura's second in-command.
gordon lam as li chiu (simplified chinese: ; traditional chinese: ; pinyin: l zho), a police officer and ip man's acquaintance, later becomes translator for the japanese officers.
fan siu-wong as kam shan-chu (; jn shnzho), an aggressive northern martial artist who comes to foshan to challenge other masters.
simon yam as chow ching-chuen (; zhu qngqun), a businessman and ip man's close friend.
xing yu as lin (; wch ln), the first son of a restaurant owner in foshan, he is a martial artist and ip man's friend.
wong you-nam as yuan, the second son of a restaurant owner in foshan who causes a lot of trouble.
calvin cheng as chow kong-yiu, the son of the cotton mill owner, who is interested in learning kung fu.
chen zhihui as master liu (; ; lio shf), a martial arts master.


== production ==

the idea of an ip man biopic originated in 1998 when jeffrey lau and corey yuen discussed the idea of making a film based on bruce lee's martial arts master. however, paragon films ltd, the studio producing the proposed film, closed and the project was abandoned. producer raymond wong decided to develop his own ip man film with full consent from ip's sons, and had filmmakers head to foshan to research ip's life. ip chun, ip man's eldest son, along with martial arts master leo au-yeung and several other wing chun practitioners served as technical consultants for the film. principal photography for ip man began in march 2008 and ended in august; filming took place in shanghai, which was used to architecturally recreate foshan. during filming, conflicts arose between the producers of ip man and filmmaker wong kar-wai over the film's working title. wong, who had been developing his own ip man biopic, clashed with the producers after learning that their film would be titled grandmaster ip man (chinese: ), which was too similar to the title of wong's film, the grandmaster.
ip man is the first film based on the life of ip man. it also marks the fourth film collaboration between director wilson yip and actor donnie yen. the two also reunite with co-star simon yam after 2005's spl: sha po lang. the screenplay for ip man was written by edmond wong, the son of film producer raymond wong. wong was the screenwriter of yip and yen's second collaboration, 2006's dragon tiger gate. ip man's eldest son, ip chun, his student leo au-yeung, and changquan gold medalist to yu-hang served as technical consultants for the film, providing advice on the film's story and martial arts choreography. the music for the film was provided by veteran japanese composer kenji kawai, who also served as a composer on the 2006 film, dragon tiger gate which featured wilson yip and donnie yen as director and actor respectively.


=== pre-production ===
the film was originally conceived in 1998 when jeffrey lau and corey yuen first thought of the idea of making a film based on ip man's life. donnie yen signed onto the project, hoping to star as ip, with stephen chow co-starring as bruce lee. yen had signed the contract and received part of the acting fee. however, the studio producing the film closed, and the project was abandoned.in december 2007, plans to make a new ip man film were announced with the filmmakers researching ip's life in foshan. producer raymond wong stated that the film would take on a similar look and feel to spl: sha po lang. on 26 february 2008, a press conference for the film was held in foshan, where it was announced that wilson yip would be directing the film, while yen would appear in the leading role as ip. lynn hung, lam ka-tung, simon yam were announced to be appearing in supporting roles, while sammo hung would serve as the film's martial arts choreographer. casting director zhang yan bin spent three months casting actors in various roles for the film. he had completed casting during principal photography in march 2008.


=== filming ===
principal photography for ip man began in march 2008, and was completed by the end of august. a majority of the film focuses on events surrounding ip man that took place in foshan in the 1930s and 1940s during the sino-japanese war. since the buildings in modern-day foshan are architecturally different from the ones of the film's period, the filmmakers decided to shoot the film in shanghai.filming first took place in a storeroom in the industrial district of shanghai. having difficulties scouting a cotton factory suitable for shooting, set designers decided to recreate one in the style of the 1930s. they spent weeks transforming an abandoned storeroom into the zhen hua cotton mill factory, a 1930s cotton mill factory founded by ip's friend chow ching-chuen (played in the film by simon yam) during the sino-japanese war. it was where ip man first taught wing chun openly to the public.production designer kenneth mak included western elements in his design, since foshan, in earlier years, was a unique place where chinese and western cultures converged. pillars were made to resemble english lampposts, and western lighting, chairs and tableware were also used. to convey the culture and feel of the time, the buildings were made to look obsolete and worn out. apart from historical references, mak also created a glass house which was used in a scene in the film.


=== stunts and choreography ===

the martial arts choreography was designed by sammo hung and veteran fight and stunt coordinator tony leung siu-hung. hung had previously collaborated with wilson yip and donnie yen as an actor in the 2005 film spl: sha po lang. he was hired as the choreographer mainly because of his experience on the 1978 film warriors two and 1982's the prodigal son, both of which involved wing chun. when asked how he would work with yen to direct the action scenes, hung replied matter-of-factly, "with my mouth."yen described the role as the most emotionally and mentally difficult in his career. he spent months preparing for the role by going on a strict diet which consisted of eating one meal a day, training in wing chun, and learning more about ip man through his two sons. this was all in the hopes of portraying an erudite and cultured ip man, as well as bringing out the special traits of wing chun. yen even went as far as to stay in character after filming, wearing his costume and changing his voice and movement patterns. while rehearsing a fight scene, yen was reportedly injured when an axe wielder accidentally slashed the side of his left eye. yen also had a masseur on set as he could not raise his right shoulder due to an injury.japanese actor hiroyuki ikeuchi, who holds a black belt in judo, found it "difficult" working under hung's command. in one scene, he suffered a mild concussion after receiving four consecutive blows from celebrated fight co-ordinator edward 'sweco' chan. hung later praised yen and ikeuchi's performances in the film, even though ikeuchi was not trained in chinese martial arts and was not given a lot of complex moves.


== film title controversy ==
ip man's original title was controversial. it was disputed when film director wong kar-wai announced plans to make his own ip man film with tony leung chiu-wai while filming 2046. wong had planned his own ip man biopic titled the great master (), with leung playing the role of ip. wong's film, however, had been in development hell, having been announced several years earlier. producer raymond wong wanted to name his film grandmaster yip man, which bore a resemblance to the title wong kar-wai wanted to use for his film.to settle the dispute, raymond wong publicly retracted the film title, stating "actually, all along, we have called our film ip man, but our mainland investors said that yip man was a great master of his times, so we changed our title to grandmaster yip man out of respect for him." in a more recent interview, raymond wong revealed that the great master is currently in development. wong kar-wai's ip man film, titled the grandmaster, was released on 8 january 2013 in china.


== release ==
ip man premiered in beijing, china on 10 december 2008, only two days prior to its release in china. the film was later released in malaysia, singapore and new zealand on 18 december 2008, one day prior to its release date in hong kong.  the film was released in the united kingdom on 2 october 2009. in 2010, mandarin films sold north american distribution rights for the film to distributor well go usa.


=== reception ===
prior to its theatrical release in china, ip man held a test screening in beijing on 4 december 2008. the film was highly praised, based on survey sheets returned by the audience. donnie yen's portrayal of ip man was repeatedly hailed as the year's best performance. high praise was also given to the film's co-stars, fan siu-wong, lam ka-tung, and lynn hung. ip man also received positive reactions from film critics. salon's andrew o'hehir deemed ip man a "well-paced and satisfying piece of chinese-nationalist pulp," referring to the film's heavy anti-japanese sentiment.derek elley of variety magazine wrote in his review, "yen, who's taking on real star charisma in middle age, is aces as ip, with a simple dignity that exactly mirrors the movie's own and a gracefulness in combat that's very different from his trademark whiplash style." malaysian film critic lim chang moh of the malay mail awarded the film three stars out of four, writing that the film was "nicely balanced with great martial arts action and an engaging narrative." lim later placed the film at number six in his list of "top ten movies of 2008." jen ogilvie of fortean times wrote, "what carries ip man is its dramatic charge: it is the story's entanglement in the real horrors of japanese occupation that pulls the viewer in and builds tension into the fight scenes."the review aggregator website rotten tomatoes reported that 85% of critics have given the film a positive review based on 27 reviews, with an average rating of 6.6/10. the site's critics consensus reads, "at once beholden to the established conventions of the genre and delightfully subversive of them, ip man is one of the most exciting  and refreshingly character-driven  martial arts films in years." at metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 59 out of 100 based on 9 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".


==== fact and fiction ====
the film was never meant to be a true biographical film to ip man's life, but to broadly touch on the elements from his life. most of the central turns of the plot are there only for the purpose of making a movie more exciting, including the scenes depicting duels between ip man and the japanese, including consul general miura yoshiaki (), as well as ip man encountering hardship during the second sino-japanese war.ip man's eldest son, ip chun, would have preferred the film to be shot on location in foshan and noted the mansion was grander than the original one.


=== box office ===
ip man grossed 14,948,157 (us$2,188,982) on its opening weekend in china. the film's revenues increased largely by 86.1%, grossing 27,812,224 (us$4,073,201) to retain second place at the box office. the film experienced a small decrease in revenue in its third weekend, dropping 10.5% to 24,889,189 ($3,645,112), though remaining in second place. ip man continued to decrease in revenue, grossing 19,956,454 (us$2,922,695) in its fourth week while staying in second place. after six weeks of theatrical release, ip man grossed a total of 93,740,529 (us$13,728,640). the film was china's 13th highest-grossing film of 2008.during its opening weekend in hong kong, ip man came in first place at the box office, grossing hk$4.5 million (us$579,715). in its second week, ip man moved to second place, while grossing hk$6,156,765 (us$789,303) with a 36.2% increase in revenue. the film continued to decrease in revenue in its third week, grossing hk$3,494,366 ($447,981), while staying in second place at the box office.  ip man moved to third place in its fourth week, grossing hk$2,075,250 ($266,055). after seven weeks of theatrical release in hong kong, ip man had grossed hk$25,581,958.69 (us$3,300,847) domestically. the film ranks as the 8th highest-grossing film of 2008. in total, the film had grossed $21,888,598 worldwide, despite not being released in north america and most of europe.


=== home media ===
ip man was released on dvd and blu-ray formats on 13 february 2009. releases include single-disc and two-disc special-edition formats. features for the special edition include deleted scenes, a making-of featurette, a theatrical trailer, interviews with director wilson yip and actor donnie yen and featurettes on both ip man and wing chun martial arts. ip man was released on dvd and blu-ray in the united states on 27 july 2010. a 3-disc deluxe collector's edition was released in china, but only contains mandarin-dubbed soundtracks and no english subtitles.


== accolades ==


== sequels ==

ip man is the first film in a tetralogy. donnie yen reprised the lead role in the sequel ip man 2, the second feature film based on the life of ip man. the film focuses on ip's movements in hong kong as he attempts to propagate his discipline of wing chun martial arts; at the end it also briefly introduces a young bruce lee prior to becoming one of ip's most famed disciples. ip man 2 was released theatrically in hong kong in late april 2010. lynn hung and fan siu-wong reprise their supporting roles, while martial arts choreographer sammo hung appears as a master of hung ga martial arts.
yen expressed his lack of interest in making a third film, feeling that, "ip man 2 will incontrovertibly become a classic, bettering the first." yen later stated that after ip man 2, he would no longer be involved in a film based on ip's life. while both donnie yen and raymond wong were not keen on making a third ip man film, director wilson yip expressed interest in making one that would focus on the relationship between ip and bruce lee. while ip man 2 very briefly shows lee as a child, yip hoped to find a suitable actor to portray lee as an adult for the third installment.in january 2014, variety reported that ip man 3 would begin shooting in 2015 with donnie yen reprising his role as ip man and wilson yip returning to direct. the film was initially scheduled for a late 2015 release, but eventually it was released in early 2016.
ip man 4 was released in 2019. yen again plays the lead role, with yip as director and kwok-kwan chan as bruce lee.


== see also ==
history of wing chun
wing chun terms, for names of various wing chun techniques.
branches of wing chun, a student-teacher family tree within the chinese martial art wing chun.
list of martial arts films


== references ==


== external links ==
official website en
official website chinese
ip man at imdb
ip man at the hong kong movie database
ip man at allmovie
ip man at metacritic
ip man at rotten tomatoes
ip man at mandarinfilms.com (english)
ip man at mandarinfilms.com (traditional chinese)
ip man at mandarinfilms.com (simplified chinese)
ip man movie review
ip man movie review at oldschoolkungfu.com (english)