iris is a 2001 biographical drama film about novelist iris murdoch and her relationship with her husband john bayley. directed by richard eyre from a screenplay he co-wrote with charles wood, the film is based on bayley's 1999 memoir elegy for iris. judi dench and jim broadbent portray murdoch and bayley during the later stages of their marriage, while kate winslet and hugh bonneville appear as the couple in their younger years. the film contrasts the start of their relationship, when murdoch was an outgoing, dominant individual compared to the timid and scholarly bayley, and their later life, when murdoch was suffering from alzheimer's disease and tended to by a frustrated bayley in their north oxford home in charlbury road. the beach scenes were filmed at southwold in suffolk, one of murdoch's favourite haunts.
the film had its world premiere on 14 december 2001, and was released theatrically in the united kingdom on 18 january 2002, and the united states on 29 march 2002. it grossed $16.2 million on a $5.5 million budget and received positive reviews, with praise towards the performances. for his role as bayley, broadbent won best supporting actor at the academy awards. the film also picked up nominations for dench as best actress and winslet for best supporting actress.


== plot ==
when the young iris murdoch meets fellow student john bayley at somerville college, oxford, he is a naive virgin easily flummoxed by her libertine spirit, arch personality, and obvious artistic talent. decades later, little has changed and the couple keeps house, with john doting on his more famous wife. when iris begins experiencing forgetfulness and dementia, however, the devoted john struggles with hopelessness and frustration, and becomes her caretaker, as his wife's mind deteriorates from the ravages of alzheimer's disease.


== cast ==
judi dench as iris murdochkate winslet as young iris
jim broadbent as john bayleyhugh bonneville as young john
penelope wilton as janet stone
juliet aubrey as young janet
timothy west as maurice
samuel west as young maurice
siobhan hayes as checkout girl
kris marshall as dr gudgeon


== reception ==
iris received positive reviews from critics, with a 79% "fresh" rating on rotten tomatoes from a sample of 110 critics, and an average rating of 7.09/10. the website's critical consensus states, "a solidly constructed drama, iris is greatly elevated by the strength of its four lead performances." the movie received a metacritic score of 76 based on 30 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".


=== awards and nominations ===
academy awards
best actress in a leading role: judi dench
best actor in a supporting role: jim broadbent (won)
best actress in a supporting role: kate winsletbafta awards
best british film
best performance by an actor in a leading role: jim broadbent
best performance by an actress in a leading role: judi dench (won)
best performance by an actor in a supporting role: hugh bonneville
best performance by an actress in a supporting role: kate winslet
best screenplay - adapted
broadcast film critics association
best supporting actor - jim broadbent
golden globe awards
best performance by an actress in a motion picture - drama: judi dench
best supporting actor - motion picture - jim broadbent (won)
best supporting actress - motion picture: kate winslet
los angeles film critics association 
best supporting actor: jim broadbent (also for moulin rouge!) (won)
best supporting actress: kate winslet (won)
satellite awards
best performance by an actress in a motion picture, drama: judi dench
best performance by an actor in a supporting role, drama: jim broadbent
best performance by an actress in a supporting role, drama: kate winslet
screen actors guild awards
outstanding performance by a female actor in a leading role: judi dench
outstanding performance by a male actor in a supporting role: jim broadbent


== references ==


== external links ==
iris at imdb
iris at box office mojo
iris at rotten tomatoes
iris at metacritic
iris at literary fiction, bellaonline