irma vep is a 1996 film directed by the french director olivier assayas, starring hong kong actress maggie cheung (playing herself) in a story about the disasters that result as a middle-aged french film director (played by jean-pierre laud) attempts to remake louis feuillade's classic silent film serial les vampires. taking place as it does largely through the eyes of a foreigner (cheung), it is also a meditation on the state of the french film industry.
the film was screened in the un certain regard section at the 1996 cannes film festival.


== plot ==
cheung is employed to play the film-within-the-film's heroine, irma vep (an anagram for vampire), a burglar, who spends most of the film dressed in a tight, black, latex rubber catsuit, defending her director's odd choices to hostile crew members and journalists.  as the film progresses, the plot mirrors the disorientation felt by the film's director.  cheung the character is in many ways seen by other characters as an exotic sex object dressed in a latex catsuit; both the director and cheung's costume designer zoe (nathalie richard) have crushes on her.
the film makes reference to iconic figures in french film history: louis feuillade, musidora, arletty, franois truffaut, the groupe slon, alain delon, and catherine deneuve.  thematically, the film questions the place of french cinema today.  it is not a "mourning for cinema with the romantic nostalgia" but "more like the mexican day of the dead: remembrance as an act of celebration," so that "it is less a film about re-presenting the past, than it is a film about addressing the present, specifically the place of france within the global economy."


== cast ==
maggie cheung as herself
jean-pierre laud as ren vidal
nathalie richard as zo
antoine basler as journalist
nathalie boutefeu as laure
alex descas as desormeaux
dominique faysse as mat
arsine khanjian as l'amricaine
bernard nissile as markus
olivier torres as ferdinand and moreno
bulle ogier as mireille
lou castel as jos mirano
jacques fieschi as roland
estelle larrivaz as la standardiste
balthazar clmenti as robert, assistant


== production ==
the idea for the film was born out of an attempted collaboration among assayas, claire denis, and atom egoyan, who wanted to experiment with the situation of a foreigner in paris. in the 1915 original serial, written and directed by louis feuillade, irma vep was played by french silent film actress musidora (18891957). much of the film depicts set-related incidents that echo scenes in truffaut's la nuit americaine (english title: day for night), to which irma vep owes a large thematic debt.
however, assayas publicly stated that although he considers la nuit americaine a great film, it is more about the fantasy of filmmaking than the reality. assayas credits rainer werner fassbinder's beware of a holy whore as a greater inspiration.
assayas married cheung in 1998. they divorced in 2001. they again collaborated in 2004 on the film clean.


== reception ==
irma vep received a positive critical reaction. on rotten tomatoes, the film holds a rating of 93% from 41 critics.


== references in other media ==
lettrist footage from the film, along with shots from the original les vampires, are used in white ring's video for their single ixc999.
a character in the 5-comic series "anno dracula - 1895: seven days in mayhem" by kim newman and paul mccaffrey.


== home media ==
irma vep is released on blu-ray and dvd through the criterion collection on april 27, 2021.


== see also ==
louis feuillade, director of the original serial film les vampires (19151916)
the mystery of irma vep, a 1984 play for two characters by charles ludlam
lettrism, inspiration for some sequences of the film


== references ==


== external links ==
irma vep at imdb
irma vep at allmovie
irma vep: film in flux an essay by aliza ma at the criterion collection
irma vep at rotten tomatoes
irma vep at box office mojo