ironclad: battle for blood is a 2014 epic war film directed by jonathan english. it is the sequel to his 2011 film ironclad.


== plot ==
five years after the events of ironclad, the de vesci family struggles with scot raiders along the english-scottish border. a blood feud begins after the scot chieftain's son is killed in one of these raids. the wounded de vesci patriarch, gilbert, sends his son hubert to seek help from his nephew, a "great warrior" named guy de lusignan.
this guy is revealed to be none other than baron d'aubigny's idealistic squire from ironclad. unable to find peace after the events at rochester, he has grown into a cynical, hard-bitten fighting man who makes a living in mercenary work and underground bloodsports. shrugging off huberts appeal to family, he demands payment for his services and those of his partner berenger, forcing hubert to hand over the last of the de vesci fortune. to bolster their numbers, guy saves a condemned murderer called crazy mary with a bribe, but end up getting "two for the price of one" when authorities come after the headsman, pierrepoint, for selling prisoners.
hubert leads the four mercenaries back to the besieged de vesci castle, and they help the garrison beat back the scot attacks. guy's reunion with his relations proves awkward. his beautiful, spoiled cousin blanche spurns him at first, especially after learning that he came for money instead of family, but begins to warm to him after he saves her from scot infiltrators. mary seduces hubert and they start a secret relationship.
casualties mount as the siege drags on. gilbert de vesci dies of his wound, passing his lordship on to hubert. his wife joan later takes poison to join him, believing the battle lost. pierrepoint is murdered by mary, who held a grudge against her would-be executioner. at last, the scots resort to fire, burning down the castle gates and storming the keep. berenger, caught outside, nearly wins a duel with the scot chieftain before the raiders interrupt and kill him. hubert entrusts his sisters to guy before making a last stand with mary as lord of the castle.
the scots overpower hubert and mary, executing the latter by hanging. to spare hubert the same fate, guy recalls his honor and heritage and challenges the scot chieftain to single combat. he emerges victorious with unexpected help from blanche. with their leader dead, the clan renounces the blood feud and returns to the hills. an epilogue narrated by hubert reveals that despite his apparent change of heart at the sieges end, guy stayed on the mercenary path, and went on to ply his trade in the hundred years' war in france.


== cast ==
tom austen as guy de lusignan, a hardened mercenary who fought as a squire at the famous siege of rochester castle
david rintoul as gilbert de vesci, a former crusader and lord of the de vesci castle
michelle fairley as joan de vesci, gilberts wife
tom rhys harries as hubert de vesci, gilberts son
roxanne mckee as blanche de vesci, gilberts spoiled older daughter
rosie day as kate de vesci, gilberts younger daughter
danny webb as smith, gilberts doughty manservant
david caves as berenger, guys friend and fellow mercenary who owes him a life debt
twinnie lee moore as crazy mary, a condemned murderer
andy beckwith as pierrepoint (charles montserrat de pierrepoint iii), an executioner
predrag bjelac as maddog, chieftain of the scot raiders


== reception ==
guy lodge of variety wrote that english "rehashes most of his technical devices from the first film" and noted that the "production and costume design on the serbian-shot production are economically restrained," though "andreas weidingers kitschily choral score is anything but."


== references ==


== external links ==
ironclad: battle for blood at imdb