ishaqzaade (transl.lover) is a 2012 indian hindi-language romantic action film written and directed by habib faisal, and produced by aditya chopra under yash raj films starring parineeti chopra and arjun kapoor in their first lead film. the official trailer was unveiled on 15 march 2012, and the film was released on 11 may 2012. it received positive reviews from critics, garnering high praise for chopra's performance, and was a commercial success at the box-office.


== title ==
the title of the film is modeled on common hindi slangs ending in zaade (meaning "child of" in persian influenced languages such as hindi and urdu) for example,  shehzaade (meaning "son of a king" or "prince") with the first part of the name ishaq being a vulgar pronunciation of ishq (meaning "passionate romantic love"). the title may be loosely translated as "rebel lovers" (literally "children of love").


== plot ==
the chauhans and the qureshis are two political families whose rivalry and mutual hatred for one another goes back generations. parma (arjun kapoor) is a good-for-nothing local thug, grandson of the patriarch chauvinist and grandfather, surya chauhan. surya often takes digs at parma for being the useless son of his widowed daughter-in-law parvati, and this makes parma try to prove himself worthy. zoya (parineeti chopra), a practising muslim who offers salat five times a day, is the trigger-happy, hot-tempered, only daughter in a traditional muslim house full of brothers, along with her parents. she desires to go into politics like her father, but this dream is constantly laughed at by her family since she is a woman.
when the local elections take place, parma and zoya's canvassing efforts lead to a clash between them, which results in parma being slapped across the face by zoya. while parma is enamored by zoya's fearlessness, zoya is intrigued by his charm (including his inability to properly pronounce her name, calling her "joya", instead of the proper "zoya"). they fall in love after a series of incidents bring them together, and elope; parma converts to islam and changes his name to pervez. after marriage, parma and zoya consummate the marriage by having sex in an empty train. afterwards, parma reveals that he tricked zoya - the wedding ceremony was fake and they are not married. he perpetrated the sham wedding to get her to have sex with him, which would bring shame upon her family. he therefore took revenge against her clan, and repaid the humiliation of her slapping him earlier on. zoya is left heartbroken and devastated, as parma joins his family in a celebration of "becoming a man". zoya attempts to invade the celebration in order to shoot parma, but is intercepted by parvati, who urges her to calm down. parvati tells parma that he must honour his marriage vows regardless of whether he meant them, and do right by zoya. parma's family come to know of zoya's presence in their home and in the heat of the moment, surya shoots parvati when she tries to defend her son and daughter-in-law from the bloodthirsty gang. parma realizes his mistake and protects zoya from being murdered by his family.
parma and zoya go on the run from their families and take refuge in a brothel. at first, zoya is still furious with parma for his deception and even believes that he was trying to sell her to the brothel. she attacks him with a piece of broken glass, cutting his arm badly. the brothel madame, chand bibi (gauahar khan), allows them to stay while parma recovers and zoya begrudgingly nurses him. he asks her for forgiveness and though she refuses to grant it, she shows that she still loves him through little actions of affection. however, their mutual grief soon brings them together, giving their love a second chance. the two exchange marriage vows in a legitimate ceremony at the brothel. zoya decides to try reconciling with her family, and takes parma to her home to win over her father. they are instead met with hostility and gunshots when zoya's father puts a gun to her head, threatening to kill his own daughter.
the couple flee as zoya's father sends his men after them. zoya and parma prepare to run away to jaipur, but when parma leaves the safety of the bus to get water, their pursuers spot him and seize zoya. she breaks free as parma furiously fights to save her. they are reunited briefly, but quickly are found by parma's former friends and run to the local college, which is closed for eid. the two rival families decide that parma and zoya's marriage is a stab to their respective religious communities and political careers, and they try to kill the couple by joining forces.
parma and zoya take refuge on a terrace, engaging in a gunfire battle. with only a few bullets left, zoya realises that they are outnumbered. she asks parma to shoot her so that their love can win and they can die in the victory of their love, rather than be riddled with bullets by their own families, and allow hatred to win. the two shoot each other in the abdomen willingly and die in each other's arms, smiling. the goons check if they are dead and go inform the two families, who leave satisfied.
the film ends with parma and zoya's bodies lying on the terrace, and an on-screen message that explains how thousands of lovers like them are killed every year only because of falling in love outside their caste and/or religion.


== cast ==
parineeti chopra as zoya qureshi (few lines as mona ghosh shetty)
arjun kapoor as parma chauhan/parvez
ratan singh rathore as aftab qureshi
anil rastogi as surya chauhan
natasha rastogi as parvati (parma's mother)
charu rastogi as zoya's mother
pravin chandra (pc) as chauhan's goon
aradhana dhawan as rakshan
akash bathija as bikram
abdullah osman as chandu
shashank khaitan as dharma chauhan
ankit kakkar as karma chauhan
aftab khan as shadaab qureshi
gauahar khan as chand bibi
jafarpal dhillon as sohraab qureshi
faisal husain as mehtab
romil saraswat as javed
meeta bandhu as archana nahak
jay shanker pandey ' jay ' as chauhan's flunky


== themes & political issues ==
the film itself was both praised and drew some anger for its blunt confrontation of current issues in india regarding things such as premarital sex, marriage outside an individual's religion, caste, or other community, as well as the very real issue of honor killing. it also addressed and somewhat criticized the hypocrisy of men who engage in premarital sex (they are celebrated and considered men in the eyes of the community) versus women who do the same (they are considered a disgrace and a source of shame). in addition, the film was notable for presenting the struggles of indian widows and prostitutes in a sympathetic light.


== production ==


=== casting ===
it was announced that newcomer arjun kapoor had joined the cast of ishaqzaade in late 2011. earlier, arjun kapoor was to debut in another yash raj production, virus diwan. however, the film got shelved and therefore yash raj films designed ishaqzaade for arjun kapoor. rekha and chinni prakash, national award winners for jodhaa akbar (2008) were chosen as the choreographers, while sham kaushal is the action director.


=== filming ===
filming began on 15 october 2011. a major part of the film was shot in lucknow, hardoi, uttar pradesh and at other sites near lucknow.


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film is composed by amit trivedi, who has worked the first time with yash raj films, and lyrics were penned by kausar munir, except "chokra jawaan" was written by habib faisal. the tracks "pareshaan" and "jhallah wallah" were remixed by abhijit vaghani. the soundtrack album was released on 20 april 2012. the background score was composed by ranjit barot.


=== track listing ===
all tracks are written by kausar munir, except where noted. tracks "pareshaan" and "jhallah wallah" were remixed by abhijit vaghani.


=== reception ===
the album received positive reviews with major praise for "pareshaan" song which also topped the charts for a long period of time.
music aloud rated the album 9/10, saying that "amit trivedi brushes off that relative low phase of 2011 with a stunner for ishaqzaade." bolly spice gave the album 9/10, explaining that "amit trivedi is definitely one of the best composers around and he proves his detractors wrong with this soundtrack that stays true to his style and shows his versatility. it is easily the best soundtrack of this year so far." glamsham gave the album 8/10, noting that "overall the album delivers a satisfying listening experience and should add one more success to both the producer and composer's credits." joginder tuteja of bollywood hungama gave the album 7/10, saying that "with kausar munir's lyrics further setting the stage for him, amit trivedi comes up with a soundtrack which may surprise listeners to begin with (due to its unusual flavour) but should eventually find acceptance in due course of time." times of india gave the album 3 out of 5 stars, commenting that ishaqzaade "may not have too much on the platter with just 5 original tracks but it still manages to strike a chord with the listener. the album is definitely worth a shot." richa bhatia of times of india praised the soundtrack's use of dubstep, a genre of electronic dance music, along with the "punchy" lyrics, "chutney and dash." film composer anu malik also praised the soundtrack, stating that "it is the first time i have observed dubstep in a film and it's incredible."


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
ishaqzaade received positive reviews from critics. taran adarsh of bollywood hungama gave the movie 3.5 stars out of 5, saying that "on the whole, ishaqzaade, a volatile and intense story with ample doses of fanatical romance, should appeal to a pan-india audience. this broadly engaging love story has a winsome pair who deliver dexterous performances, besides popular music and several poignant moments, which should appeal to fans of mainstream films. go for it!" mrigank dhaniwala of koimoi gave the movie 3.5 stars out of 5, commenting that "on the whole, ishaqzaade is an entertaining fare which works on the strength of its first half and the performances." khalid mohamed of deccan chronicle gave the movie 3.5 stars out of 5, concluding that "ishaqzaade kicks off weakly and has its share of the deja pooh. gradually, though, it gets under your skin..and rocks. absolutely see-grade."rachit gupta of filmfare gave the movie 3 stars out of 5, quoting that "on the face of it, this is a fantastic indian adaptation of romeo and juliet. but if you've ever loved someone without a sense of inhibition, then deeper in the recesses of its story, ishaqzaade is a saga of love being more important than life and death." daily bhaskar gave the movie 3 stars out of 5, writing that "brilliant performance by the lead cast, an ecstatic climax which breaks the typical 'happily-ever-after' ending, is surely one of the top reasons to visit your nearest theatre. people from metros might find it difficult to relate to the culture or political drama that involves frequent gun-firing. parineeti and arjun's chemistry will remind one of the ek duuje ke liye genre of love stories from bollywood." shomini sen of zee news gave the movie 3 stars out of 5, noting that "habib faisal's earlier film do dooni chaar (2010) had captured the delhi and punjabi culture well. in ishaqzaade, he captures a small town in northern india and its typical nuances well."


=== box-office ===
ishaqzaade grossed 132 crore (us$19 million) worldwide.
india
ishaqzaade had a good opening, with an occupancy of 7090% in theaters and went on to collect 45.4 million (us$640,000) nett in its first day,51.5 million (us$720,000) on its second day and 62.2 million (us$870,000) on its third day. the movie collected 159 million (us$2.2 million) nett in its first weekend and 257 million (us$3.6 million) nett in its first week. it broke the record of jaane tu... ya jaane na (2008) for the highest first weekend and first week collections for a hindi non-starcast film in india. the movie had a good second weekend and collected 73.8 million (us$1.0 million) nett. the movie had a good second week, collecting 125 million (us$1.8 million) nett. the movie had a strong third weekend and went on to collect 43.4 million (us$610,000) nett. the movie collected 75.5 million (us$1.1 million) nett in its third week and thus declared a "hit". the film's lifetime collections in india were rs. 47.50 crore.
overseas
ishaqzaade was released in the middle east and smaller markets. it grossed 25.0 million (us$350,000) at the end of its run. the film was not released theatrically in major markets like north america, canada, united kingdom, nepal, pakistan, new zealand and australia.


== awards ==
national film awardsnational film award  special mention  parineeti chopra58th filmfare awardsbest female playback singer  shalmali kholgade ("pareshaan")
nominated - best actress - parineeti chopra
nominated - best music - amit trivedi
nominated - best male debut - arjun kapoorstar screen awardsbest playback singer - female  shalmali kholgade ("pareshaan")
best playback singer - male - javed ali ("ishaqzaade")stardust awardssuperstar of tomorrow  malesuperstar of tomorrow - female - parineeti chopra
superstar of tomorrow - male - arjun kapoor
best lyrics - habib faisal and kausar munir ("ishaqzaade")
best new musical sensation - female  shalmali kholgade ("pareshaan")star guild awardsbest playback singer - female - shalmali kholgade ("pareshaan")zee cine awardsbest male debut - arjun kapoor
best lyrics - kausar munir ("pareshaan")
sa re ga ma pa fresh singing talent - shalmali kholgade ("pareshaan")toifa awardsbest playback singer - female - shalmali kholgade ("pareshaan")5th mirchi music awardsnominated - album of the year - amit trivedi, kausar munir
nominated - female vocalist of the year - shalmali kholgade ("pareshaan")
nominated - upcoming female vocalist of the year - shalmali kholgade ("pareshaan")
nominated - upcoming lyricist of the year - habib faisal ("chokra jawaan")
nominated - song recording / sound engineering of the year - dipesh sharma, vijay dayal, karan kulkarni & alok punjani ("pareshaan")


== home media ==
the film is available on amazon prime video and apple tv+.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
ishaqzaade at imdb