jaani dushman: ek anokhi kahaani (transl.arch enemy: a strange story) is a 2002 indian hindi dark fantasy-action film directed and produced by rajkumar kohli, making it his last film as director. the film features an ensemble cast; including sunny deol, sunil shetty, akshay kumar, aftab shivdasani, sharad kapoor, sonu nigam (in his acting debut), arshad warsi, aditya pancholi, rambha and raj babbar with manisha koirala and armaan kohli as the main antagonists. amrish puri as a special appearance. the film was arman kohli's comeback film where he was reintroduced with a new name munish kohli. this movie received negative reviews and was a super flop at the box office. this movie is also considered one of the worst films ever made.


== plot ==
divya (manisha koirala) and karan saxena  (sunny deol) are in love and plan to marry. karan has a younger step-brother, vivek (sonu nigam), whom he looks after as if he was his own brother. divya and vivek hang out with quite a few young people of their own age, vijay (sunil shetty), atul (akshay kumar), prem (aftab shivdasani), ashok (aditya pancholi), viktor (sharad kapoor), abdul (arshad warsi), nita (rambha), rashmi (kiran rathod), niki (upasana singh) and preeti (pinky campbell).
two men named rajesh (rajat bedi) and madan (siddharth ray) attempt to rape divya, but are stopped and beaten up by karan. after apologizing, they decide to avenge their humiliation. soon after, karan leaves for a business trip abroad. divya then begins to have premonitions of a past life and later learns she was the love interest of kapil (armaan kohli), a snake with magical powers, in a previous life. their love life was shattered by an angry sage (amrish puri) who cursed them with separation until the 21st century. vasundhara, as she was called in her previous life, dies after this curse, and is reborn as divya.
rajesh, under the pretext of inviting divya to atul's party, imitates the voices of the male members of their group and tricks her into coming to an abandoned fort. divya arrives, and they brutally rape her, prompting her to kill herself. divya's friends arrive, and she curses them,
thinking that they were involved in the rape.
kapil learns of her death and comes back to life to get his revenge on everyone in the group. as a result, madan is killed on the same day, and rajesh is later killed on his wedding night by divya's ghost.
this is followed by victor being run over by kapil on a motorbike and abdul being electrocuted to death. atul and his friends, with the help of their college principal joseph (raj babbar), who is also a professor of parapsychology, summon divya's ghost, and they try to reason with her, explaining that they had nothing to do with her rape and death. however, she refuses to believe their innocence. the principal joseph then gives the group of friends necklaces and assures them that they cannot be harmed when they are wearing the necklace. atul doesn't believe this. however, when he is attacked by kapil, he realizes he survived because the necklace was stuck on his hand. however, later atul is badly injured by kapil, and he goes into a coma.
divya then enters prem's body and kills ashok. prem is thus accused of committing murder, and he is sentenced to be hanged by the court. vijay has pushed off a gym roof. vivek, afraid he's next, calls his elder brother karan.
karan arrives to rescue vivek, but before that, kapil stabs vivek using karan's body. karan is arrested after vivek accuses karan of stabbing him. atul comes out of a coma and tries to save vivek. atul gets stabbed by kapil while trying to save vivek. kapil chases vivek. atul, unable to destroy kapil or save vivek's life, goes to the same priest, who gave the lockets. atul asks the priest to save vivek's life. atul then dies due to blood loss from his injuries.
karan shows up to stop kapil from killing vivek. karan gets fatally wounded by kapil. principal joseph resurrects karan with outer-world powers, granting him supernatural powers like kapil. karan finally kills kapil. vivek turns out to be the only survivor along with his brother karan. kapil and vasundhara reunite in heaven.


== cast ==


== production ==
salman khan was the original choice for sonu nigam's role but declined the movie because of date issues. atul agnihotri was playing sharad kapoor's role in the film but later signed in for a guest appearance, then the role went to apurva agnihotri but declined it due to date issues. shah rukh khan was originally chosen to play akshay kumar's role but declined it because he was busy at filming kal ho naa ho. chandrachur singh was the first signed to play aditya pancholi's role but then he opted out. shilpa shetty was the first considered to play manisha koirala's role, but she declined the role. at one point when the film was announced, it had ajay devgn playing suniel shetty's role, sanjay dutt was going to be an extra character similar to his father sunil dutt's role in nagin (1976) and jackie shroff playing raj babbar's role.
a long star studded cast was planned for this film featuring sunny deol, shah rukh khan, salman khan, ajay devgn, sanjay dutt, jackie shroff, chandrachur singh, apurva agnihotri, aftab shivdasani, arshad warsi, shilpa shetty and armaan kohli in lead roles but then the cast subsequently changed and it starred sunny deol, akshay kumar, salman khan, suniel shetty, chandrachur singh, aftab shivdasani, arshad warsi, atul agnihotri, shilpa shetty and armaan kohli in lead roles. the film was having the concept of nagin at that time, and the heroes were playing young mature men instead of college students later cast subsequently changed to sunny deol, akshay kumar, sonu nigam, suniel shetty, aftab shivdasani, aditya pancholi, arshad warsi, sharad kapoor, manisha koirala and armaan kohli in the lead role with a different subject.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
this film received negative reviews from critics. ronjita kulkarni of rediff.com rated the film 1.5/10 saying, "the performances are half-hearted and the characters half-baked". he also called the film "unoriginal and disappointing".  akshay kumar was the only with watchable performances and star of the film,  sunil shetty was barely average & sunny deol was wasted in this movie because he did fewer scenes than his previous movies.


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
jaani dushman: ek anokhi kahani at imdb