jab pyar kisi se hota hai  (transl.when one falls in love) is a 1961 bollywood musical comedy film that became a box office hit. it was written, produced, and directed by nasir hussain. the first film hussain ever produced, it featured dev anand and hussain fixture asha parekh in the leading roles. pran played the villain in the film and rajindernath starred in a supporting role.hussain would rework some of the elements from this film into a later film, teesri manzil (1966).  this was also the only time that he used shankar jaikishan as music directors and dev anand in a leading role. the playback singers were mohammed rafi and lata mangeshkar.


== plot ==
nisha belongs to a very wealthy family of neelgaon, india. she is now of marriageable age, and her businessman dad, sardar roop singh wants her to marry his friend's son, sohan, but nisha dislikes him. while traveling to darjeeling with a dance troupe, she meets with her dad's business associates' son, popat lal, and after a few misadventures, both fall in love with each other. she takes him to meet her dad where he can also finalize his business transaction, but when roop comes inside, he finds that popat has disappeared, and in his place is another man claiming to be the real popat. nisha's heart is broken and she starts to hate popat. she does meet with popat, who tells her that his real name is sunder and both had been promised to each other by their respective parents, but roop had subsequently changed his mind. nisha believes him and agrees to marry him without her father's blessings. when the marriage is to take place, a man named khanna comes over and tells nisha that sunder is already married to a woman named shanti, who he subsequently killed, and had been the primary accused in this case by the police. watch what impact this news has on the marriage, and see what excuses sunder now comes up with.


== cast ==
dev anand as sunder / popat lal / monto
asha parekh as nisha r. singh
sulochana latkar as malti
mubarak as sardar roop singh
raj mehra as khanna
wasti as shanti
rajendra nath as popat lal / charlie
tahir hussain (as tahir husain)
dulari as roop singh's sister
bishan khanna
ram avtar
pran as sohan mofat lal


== soundtrack ==
the music was by shankar jaikishan, and the soundtrack was sung only by mohammed rafi and lata mangeshkar. many of the songs went on to become classics and are still remembered even now, particularly, "jiya o jiya" and "teri zulfon se judai", sung by mohammad rafi, were big hits as well as "sau saal pehle", by mohammad rafi and lata mangeshkar. "sau saal pehle" was later used in the tamil film vallavanukku vallavan as "manam ennum".


== references ==


== external links ==
jab pyar kisi se hota hai at imdb