jalsa (transl.fun) is a 2008 indian telugu-language action comedy film written and directed by trivikram srinivas and produced by allu aravind, under the geetha arts banner starring pawan kalyan, ileana, parvati melton, kamalinee mukerji, mukesh rishi and prakash raj. the soundtrack of the film composed by devi sri prasad, was launched on 29 february 2008. the film was released on 2 april 2008.


== plot ==
sanjay sahu aka sanju (pawan kalyan) is a post-graduate from osmania university and is working as a gym instructor. he is in love with indu (kamalini mukherjee), who wishes to marry him. she makes him meet her father (prakash raj), who is a police officer and also happens to be his old acquaintance. her father declines to approve of their love, and she is forced to marry according to her father's choice. meanwhile, indu's sister bhagyamathi aka bhagi (ileana) and her friend jyothsna aka jo (parvati melton) are chased by hoodlums before being rescued by sanju. furthermore, jo and bhagi are ragged in the college before being again rescued by sanju. both begin to like sanju and even decide to propose their love to him without their knowledge of the other. however, it is jo who proposes first to sanju, who rejects her. careful after seeing her friend's love rejected, bhagi, with the help of sreenu (sunil), begins wooing sanju.
bhagi keeps wooing sanju in different ways under sreenu's supervision. sreenu keeps advising bhagi with new ideas, so that she impresses sanju. with his idea, bhagi vacates the previous tenants in sanjus' house and gets into that house to woo sanju. she keeps trying in many ways to impress him, which evokes comedy. bhagi keeps meeting sanju, tries to know more about him. after many comical situations coming their way, love blossoms between the two, but unfortunately at a party where jo is also one of the attendees, she spills all the beans about bhagi and sanju is infuriated and breaks their relationship. but later that party night in conversation with bhagi, drunken sanju begins to showcase that he isn't a correct fit to her, yet the unending love of bhagi towards sanju, makes him fall for her and both again get into a relationship marking it with a smooch.
meanwhile, damodar reddy (mukesh rishi), a powerful land grabber who takes care of all the settlements while still in jail, is out on parole. he is in search of sanju for spoiling his land deals in the past and thrashing his son, who was one of the goons who chased bhagi. he makes an attempt on sanju's life but in vain. however, sanju's friend abhi (ali) is taken hostage during the attack. sanju rescues abhi but is enraged when his friends stop him from assaulting the kidnapper by questioning his authority to take the law into his hands and bringing them troubles. sanju then reveals his flashback, in which he hailed from a poor rural family. his brother dies of heart disease as a child. his father janardhan sahu (shishir sharma) commits suicide as crops fail, and his mother too passes away. while going to the burial ground, he repeatedly slips and swoons at a stone pillar. he plucks it out, which enrages the henchmen of damodar reddy . when they attack him, sahu beats them up, disappears into a forest, and joins naxalites. during a combing operation, he joins hands with the father of indu and bhagi - a police officer - and his team to eliminate the team in an encounter. sanju is then rehabilitated as a college student in hyderabad.
bhagi confesses to her father about her intention to marry sanju, but her father rejects it by revealing to her about sanju being an ex-lover of her sister indu, and an ex-naxal. shocked, bhagi agrees to get married as per her father's choice. her father arranges the engagement of bhagi with raghu ram (sivaji). sanju is disgusted that bhagi has given her assent to the engagement and decides to break it. meanwhile, sanju comes to know that the man who attempted on his life is none other than damodar reddy and that raghu ram is the elder son of damodar reddy. sanju confronts damodar reddy in jail and challenges him. damodar reddy gets out of jail and forcibly arranges the marriage of raghuram with bhagi. sanju, meanwhile, kidnaps the younger son of damodar reddy (aditya redij), takes him head-on, and defeats him. the film ends with bhagi marrying sanju.


== cast ==


== release ==
the film was originally scheduled to be released on 27 march 2008, but because of delays in the digital intermediate (di) process. jalsa was later released with 400 prints in 800 theaters worldwide across 1000 screens on 2 april 2008.


== awards and nominations ==
filmfare awards southnominatedbest film  telugu - allu aravind
nominatedbest director  telugu - trivikram srinivas
nominatedbest actor  telugu - pawan kalyan
nominatedbest actress  telugu - ileana
nominatedbest supporting actress  telugu - parvati melton
nominatedbest music director  telugu - devi sri prasad
nominatedbest lyricist  telugu - sirivennela sitaramasastri - "chalore chalore"santosham film awardswon best actress - ileana
wonbest director - trivikram srinivas
wonbest film - jalsa - allu aravind
wonbest music director - devi sri prasad
nominatedbest actor - pawan kalyan


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the film was launched on 29 february 2008. the audio rights were sold to aditya music for  9 million, the highest for a telugu film of its released month. the music got very good reviews from websites and an excellent response from the public itself. the music has been topping the charts since its release. devi sri prasad received the 2008 santosham best music director award for his work on the film's music.


== trivia ==
first telugu movie to release first look poster.
first telugu movie to collect 1 crore with audio cd's only.
first telugu movie to collect 10 crore in nizam region.
first telugu movie to collect 20+ crore in the first week alone.
the audio rights were sold to aditya music for  9 million, the highest for any telugu film at that point of time.
1st telugu movie to release in theaters worldwide across 1000 screens.
first time a star hero (mahesh babu ) lending voice to another star hero in tollywood.
in vijayawada over 1 lakh people watched on the first day itself a record yet to be broken.
first telugu movie ever watched by 1,17,00,000 audience in the first week.
first telugu movie to get a place in the world box office. jalsa occupied 9th position in the world box office in the first week.
jalsa occupied 16th position in the world box office in its 2nd week run. that itself is a spectacular record because no other telugu cinema has found a place on world box office, but jalsa has to find its place 2 times.
jalsa is the only film that had completed 50 days successfully in 21 centers in krishna district alone.
75000 people watched jalsa in the u.s. this is a spectacular record and this is the first time a telugu cinema has been viewed by such a huge number of audiences.
jalsa celebrated 50 days in 2 centers (new jersey, atlanta) in the u.s.a. this is the first time an indian film has celebrated 50 days in the u.s.


== references ==


== external links ==
jalsa at imdb