jamna pyari is a 2015 indian malayalam-language comedy film directed by thomas sebastian. the film stars kunchacko boban and gayathri suresh in the lead roles. the music was composed by gopi sunder. the film released on 27 august 2015, received generally positive response from critics.


== plot ==
the story begins with vasu (sijoy varghese), father of vasoottan (kunchacko boban) rescuing people from a bus which had fallen from a bridge in to a flooded river. during the rescue, vasu drowns in front of the onlookers including his friend prakashan (joy mathew), his wife and his child while trying to rescue a kid. then the story moves over to vasoottan (kunchacko boban) who is an auto-rickshaw driver, who is a very helpful person possessing many good qualities like his father. he helps anyone who is in need. sabu (suraj venjarammoodu) is vasoottan's friend, who was a one time goon and got reformed due to vasoottan's influence. vasoottan helps sabu to marry vinitha (muthumani),his love interest. one day a girl named parvathy (gayathri suresh) hires his auto to go to the [[wadakkanafter a few days prakashan's son informs that a girl had come to their studio and had inquired about vasoottan and also about the accident that took place long back in which vasoottan had lost his father. vasoottan's friend sabu speculates that it was parvathy. later, vasoottan receives a call from parvathy and she asks him to come to her house in order to meet her father. sabu and prakashettan make a bet  stating that parvathy loves vasoottan and had called him in order to fix their marriage. vasoottan goes to her house and gets to know that they had called him to seek his help to deliver 100 jamnapyari goats to a foreign firm. parvathy's father (maniyan pilla raju) and mother (anju aravind) pleads vasoottan for his help and he agrees to help them to deliver the jamna pyari goats on time (within a period of 12 days). sridharan (renji panicker) is parvathy's father's rival and he tries all ways to get their business to fail with his money and muscle power. at first vasoottan arranges 10 jamna pyaris from local, from where he gets tony kurishinkal as new to his team. then they started giving advertisements in print, audio as well visual and e-medias. they received vide responses for the ads and finally they manages to reach the target.  after too many complication, vasoottan succeed in his target and he and parvathy gets their love succeed at the end


== cast ==
kunchacko boban as vasoottan, a thrissur based auto rickshaw driver, son of vasu
gayathri suresh as parvathy (paaru)
sijoy varghese as father of vasoottan (vasu)
suraj venjaramoodu as s.p sabu
aju varghese as rameshan (raam)
renji panicker as sridharan
neeraj madhav as tony kurishinkal (bro)
joy mathew as prakashettan, friend of vasoottan's father vasu
anumol as veena
muthumani
maniyanpilla raju as parvathy's father
thrissur elsy
rajasree nair as vimala as vasoottan's mother
arjun nandhakumar as goutham/sridharan's son
santhosh keezhattoor
shiju
dinesh prabhakar
anju aravind as parvathy's mother
gayathri varsha
roja as neelambari
sonia agarwal as cameo appearance
harikumar as cameo appearance
sarath orippuram as a man in the title song.


== box office ==
the film made at a budget of 4 crore (us$560,000) stood at third position among the five onam release films at the box office. it grossed an amount of 6 crore (us$840,000) in 15 days of release. asianet bagged the satellite rights. it collected 7.4 crore (us$1.0 million) from kerala box office. it stood in the third position among the onam releases of 2015.film was a superhit


== soundtrack ==
muzik 247 released the songs of jamna pyari. the soundtrack was released during an audio launch event held at panampilly nagar, kochi. the film crew chose an auto rickshaw parking stand as the venue. actor nivin pauly was the special guest for the event who launched the audio by unveiling the cd in the presence of local auto-rickshaw drivers and the public.
the film has three songs, which are composed by gopi sundar and penned by b. k harinarayanan. these include "vasoottan" sung by [franco simon (singer)|franco simon ]], "jamnapyari" sung by sachin warrier and maqbool, and "murugappa" (also penned by kalai kumar) sung by jassie gift, divya s. menon and vijay yesudas. the lyrics of the song "vasoottan" was written in the thrissur dialect.


== references ==


== external links ==
jamna pyari at imdb
jamna pyari on facebook