janice meredith, also known as the beautiful rebel, is a silent film starring marion davies, released in 1924 and based on the book and play of the same name written by paul leicester ford and edward everett rose. the play opened at the end of 1900 and was the first starring vehicle for stage actress mary mannering.  the movie follows the actions of janice meredith, who helps george washington and paul revere during the american revolutionary war.


== plot ==
following a disappointment in love, lord brereton assumes the name of charles fownes, arranges passage to the american colonies as a bondservant, and finds a place with squire meredith, a wealthy new jersey landowner. when charles falls in love with the squire's daughter, janice, she is sent to live with an aunt in boston. janice learns of the planned british troop movement to the lexington arsenal and gives the warning that results in paul revere's ride. charles reveals his true station and becomes an aide to washington. when he is captured by the british, janice arranges his escape and later helps him learn the disposition of the british troops at trenton. janice returns to her home and agrees to marry philemon hennion, an aristocrat of her father's choosing. charles and some continental troops halt the wedding and confiscate the meredith lands. janice flees to philadelphia, and charles follows her. he is arrested but is freed when the british general, howe, recognizes charles as his old friend, lord brereton. janice and her father retire with the british to yorktown. during the bombardment by washington's forces, lord clowes binds janice and abducts her in his coach. charles rescues her. with peace restored, janice and charles meet at mount vernon, where they are to be married in the presence of president washington.


== cast ==
marion davies as janice meredith
holbrook blinn as lord clowes
harrison ford as charles fownes
macklyn arbuckle as squire meredith
joseph kilgour as general george washington
hattie delaro as mrs. meredith
george nash as lord howe
tyrone power, sr. as lord cornwallis
may vokes as susie
w.c. fields as a british sergeant
olin howland as philemon
spencer charters as squire hennion
douglas stevenson as captain mowbrary
lionel adams as thomas jefferson
edwin argus as louis xvi
lee beggs as benjamin franklin
nicolai koesberg as lafayette
ken maynard as paul revere
burton mcevilly as alexander hamilton
harlan knight as theodore larkin
walter law as general charles lee
wilfred noy as dr. joseph warren
florence turner as maid


== production ==
in her 19th film, marion davies starred as janice meredith in a story about the american revolution. as with yolanda, this film was not considered to be a hit, but the trade papers reported a record-breaking run at the cosmopolitan theater in new york. exteriors were shot in new york with extended location shooting in upstate new york. hearst built a replica of trenton, nj, in plattsburgh, and the saranac river doubled for the delaware. other scenes were filmed on lake placid. screenland noted that hearst spent $80,000 on the recreation of the battle of lexington. the film received generally good reviews. the large cast included w.c. fields in his feature film debut. davies and fields had worked together in the 1916 edition of the "ziegfeld follies."


== survival status ==
the existing print is actually the british version, which was titled the beautiful rebel.


== references ==


== external links ==
janice meredith at imdb
afi information on the film
janice meredith at allmovie