jaya janaki nayaka is a 2017 indian telugu-language romantic action film directed by boyapati srinu and produced by m. ravinder reddy under dwaraka creations banner. it stars bellamkonda sreenivas, rakul preet singh and jagapathi babu in lead roles while pragya jaiswal, sarath kumar, suman and tarun arora play other pivotal roles. the music was composed by devi sri prasad. the film was released on 11 august 2017.


== plot ==
sweety is a college-going student. her friend leaves college because an eve teaser, the son of the central minister, bothers her. when he comes to trouble her for supporting her friend, he gets beaten up by a co-student named gagan chakravarthy, his father chakravarthy, and his brother prudhvi. the central minister then makes it a point to take gagan and his family down.
gagan, chakravarthy, and pruthvi are best friends and liquor buddies and only have each other, since gagan's and pruthvi's mother died (chakravarthy's wife). they do everything from drinking alcohol to eating roadside foods and beating up wrongdoers in society. sweety starts getting attracted to gagan, and they start to hang out, and she gets to know about his family. she comes to gagan's house and makes a change in their lifestyle for their own sake, for which chakravarthy happily agrees for. in the meantime, sweety, learns about pruthvi's love failure and ends up reconciling with the would-be bride's parents, and the marriage is conducted in a grand manner. chakravarthy, upon seeing the happiness and joy in the atmosphere at the wedding, realizes that sweety is the reason behind everything and asks gagan to always be by her side, and if he is not by her side one day, then chakravarthy and his family as good as dead.
in a parallel track, the cm attends the engagement of the daughter of a very rich, righteous, ruthless yet prestige-driven businessman, aswith narayana varma. the would-be groom, however, finds a video of narayana's daughter romancing and kissing another guy that she liked before the engagement. the groom shows narayana and tells him about this. the next morning, in breaking news on tv, it is revealed that narayana has intentionally killed the groom in fear of his pride/prestige being destroyed. narayana says that the thing that he cares about the most in the world is his pride/prestige, and he will go to any extent to preserve it. he leaves a gun on the table, and forces his daughter picks it up and shoots herself. he kills her ex boyfriend too.
narayana and his company plan to build a highway that will make his company the most successful company in all of asia, but his son veerendra reveals that the project has competition in the form of the biggest liquor don in north india, arjun pawar. arjun is supported by his two brothers and has bought off all of narayana's close associates and subordinates except for his lawyer jp. arjun threatens jp, stating that if he does not agree to his terms, that his daughter should marry his youngest brother; otherwise, he will kill her. jp agrees out of fear. narayana, however, retaliates and sends veerendra to disable arjun's brother and breaks up the back and puts him in a critical condition forever. now, arjun then decides to hit back.
sweety realizes that she is truly in love with gagan and expresses her feelings towards him. gagan is delighted, and sweety takes him to her house to her father jp, where he insults him after realizing his lifestyle and the reputation that chakravarthy has in society, then proceeds to insult sweety. enraged, gagan gives jp a warning, but sweety, who cares for her father's life more than anything, sends gagan away and tells him to never come back.
heartbroken, gagan drives and tries to forget sweety but is unable to and gets into a car accident. fearing for his life, chakravarthy and his uncle send him away with known relatives in vizag. faluguni arrives at the airport and picks gagan up, and gagan realizes that her lifestyle is young, wild, and free. falguni, however, has no interest in gagan romantically. while driving back after a party on the beach. gagan witnesses a family being attacked. he decides to save them, and they turn out to be narayana's family, and arjun's brother has been sent to finish them off. narayana's family pleads gagan to save them and their daughter-in-law. gagan fights off some of pawar's men and saves the daughter-in-law, who happens to be sweety. shocked, gagan is then shot four times and is left for dead. the doctors end up saving him on the orders of aswith narayana varma and then the flashback is revealed by narayana's wife.
after breaking arjun's brother's back, narayana then met jp, and they decide to get veerendra married with sweety. at the wedding, as veerendra is about to tie the knot, he is shot and killed, and arjun's men come and kidnap everyone to kill them. since veerendra died at the hands of arjun, jp has no choice but to let her daughter away from the narayana family. however, narayana's sister phones her brother and tells him that they need sweety, since she is almost married to veerendra, and decided to adopt sweety as their daughter-in-law. since her would-be husband is dead, sweety becomes a poor widow with no family emotions. gagan then vows to protect sweety until he dies and will solve all her problems. narayana's sister comes and says that the family must perform a pooja at the hamsala deevi river area. she sees gagan, who says that he cannot come along. narayana's sister, in reality, has cut a deal with arjun to get sweety and leave her family alone, and arjun agrees. as narayana and the rest of his family perform the pooja, they attacked by arjun's men. as they are about to attack sweety, gagan emerges from the water along with chakravarthy and nandu and kills everyone. he takes sweety along with him, and narayana feels that his pride/prestige has once again been damaged. then, the central minister enrages both narayana and arjun on gagan, so they both join hands with each other in eliminating gagan once and for all.
in the attack, chakravarthy and pruthvi are seriously injured, and narayana kidnaps sweety. gagan then lugs his injured brother and father to where sweety is being kept and kills everyone but narayana. finally, gagan says that narayana lost his pride/prestige a long time ago when he joined hands with his enemy who killed his son just to kill a mere girl. as narayana is listening to this, he shoots himself and dies. chakravarthy decides to get gagan married to sweety and asks what name she would like on the wedding card. sweety says "janaki", and the film ends on a happy note.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by devi sri prasad. music released on junglee music.


== production ==


=== development ===
bellamkonda suresh selected director boyapati srinu to direct his son bellamkonda sreenivas' third film. it was confirmed by the director later when the script work was in its final stages. the film was officially launched at annapurna studios in hyderabad on 27 august 2014. devi sri prasad was declared as the music director, arthur a. wilson was declared as the cinematographer, a. s. prakash was declared as the art director while the story and dialogues were written by m. rathnam. the film was said to be on the lines of boyapati srinu's debut film bhadra and the script work was complete by then. nallamalupu bujji was reported to replace bellamkonda suresh as the film's producer due to the latter's financial crisis. however, sreenivas confirmed that his father would produce the film and it has been delayed due to story discussions but not due to financial problems.


=== casting ===
early reports said that shruti haasan would be selected as the female lead of the film. however, in a press meet, bellamkonda suresh said that the female lead is yet to be finalized and discussions are going on. tamannaah was selected as the female lead who said that her role was well written, unique and something she never did in her earlier films. on the day of launch, boyapati srinu said that another heroine will act in a guest role. reports in mid-october 2014 suggested that tamannaah may opt out of the film as she has to accommodate dates for baahubali and for a tamil film. in early november 2014, it was known that sreenivas is working on his body language and would sport a new look for the film.due to the halt in the project, search for the female lady began in january 2016 and was reported that makers are keen on signing shruti haasan or rakul preet singh. on 17 january 2016 it was confirmed that rakul preet singh was signed in as a female lead on paying her an amount of 1.50 crore (us$210,000). aadhi pinisetty was roped in to play a crucial role. pragya jaiswal was cast as the second female lead.


=== filming ===
the makers planned to start the regular shooting in early november 2014. in early november 2016, the filming was announced to start in december 2016 once sreenivas undergoes the transformation envisioned by boyapati srinu.the principal photography began in mid-november 2016.after a much delay of two years the shooting commenced in november 2016. it released on 11 august 2017.
the film was also dubbed into hindi as jaya janaki nayaka - khoonkhar and premiered on zee cinema on 7 july 2018 and laterely dubbed in malayalam as njan gagan and premiered on flowers tv and released on youtube by pen movies channel, which has reached more than 330 million views.


== references ==


== external links ==
jaya janaki nayaka at imdb