jeffrey is a 1995 american gay romantic comedy film directed by christopher ashley. it is based on a play depicting the life and times of richard jeffrey by paul rudnick, who also wrote the screenplay.
starring steven weber as jeffrey and michael t. weiss as steve, the film features cameos by olympia dukakis, victor garber, gregory jbara, robert klein, nathan lane, camryn manheim, kathy najimy, kevin nealon, ethan phillips, and sigourney weaver. christine baranski has a small role as the socialite hostess of a fundraiser that (in jeffrey's imagination) turns into a cater-waiter hoedown orgy. the film co-stars patrick stewart as sterling, an older gay decorator whose partner, darius (bryan batt), dies of aids complications.


== plot ==
the story takes place in manhattan during the height of the aids epidemic and revolves around the title character, jeffrey (steven weber), a gay man who has sworn off sex because of the epidemic. almost immediately thereafter, jeffrey meets steve (michael t. weiss), a hunky, charming hiv positive man. he then experiences an emotional conflict as he must face his fear in order to accept love, often breaking the fourth wall to do so.
it is not so much that jeffrey is afraid of dying himself, but that he is afraid that he will fall in love with someone who is bound to die; thus, his celibacy is not only about sex, but also about relationships in general.
helping him through this period of his life and advising him is a cast of cameos including patrick stewart, nathan lane, and sigourney weaver.


== cast ==
steven weber as jeffrey
michael t. weiss as steve howard
patrick stewart as sterling
bryan batt as darius
christine baranski as ann marwood bartle
victor garber as tim
camryn manheim as single woman
sigourney weaver as debra moorehouse
kathy najimy as acolyte
ethan phillips as dave
debra monk and peter maloney as mom and dad
michele pawk as young mother
nathan lane as father dan
olympia dukakis as mrs. marcangelo
gregory jbara as angelique marcangelo
kevin nealon (uncredited) as tv reporter


== critical reception ==
reviews to jeffrey were mixed to positive, as it holds a 68% rating on rotten tomatoes based on 28 reviews. patrick stewart got great acclaim for his supporting role, winning several critics awards, and even generated oscars buzz, but failed to secure a nomination.
caryn james from the new york times wrote  for anyone who missed the play, the film offers a strong echo of its best qualities and a couple of truly hilarious moments.


== home media ==
jeffrey was released on vhs after its initial theatrical run, and on dvd in 2003. shout! factory released the film on blu-ray in 2019.


== references ==


== external links ==
jeffrey at imdb
jeffrey at allmovie
jeffrey at box office mojo
jeffrey at rotten tomatoesreferencesjeffrey at msn.com
jeffrey at logo
spanish-language page for jeffrey
review by roger ebert
on-set photos at gregoryjbara.com featuring jbara, weber, dukakis, and stewart