jhankaar beats is a 2003 indian musical comedy film directed by sujoy ghosh and released by pritish nandy communications. it stars juhi chawla, sanjay suri, rahul bose, debutant shayan munshi, rinke khanna and riya sen. the soundtrack of the film features the popular songs "tu aashiqui hai", and "suno na" sung by playback singer kk and shaan respectively and  written by vishal dadlani.


== plot ==
this movie was a tribute to r. d. burman. jhankaar beats is a story about love, friendship, and music.
deep (sanjay suri) is happily married to shanti (juhi chawla), with a little daughter muskaan and another baby on the way. rishi (rahul bose) is his best friend and colleague at an advertising agency. rishi is a little immature and stubborn and this keeps on causing fights at home with his equally headstrong lawyer wife nicky (rinke khanna). rishi and deep are dedicated musicians, obsessive about the music of r.d. burman. they play at a club sometimes and compete in an annual pop music contest called "jhankaar beats"  which they have lost for the past two years.
rishi has been kicked out of his house by nicky and the two are considering getting a divorce. deep's nagging mother-in-law has come for a two-month visit. the men are under pressure to get an advertising campaign ready for a new client, an oddball condom manufacturer. around this time they meet neel (shayan munshi), who is the son of their boss mr. kapoor and is joining the company.  neel is an ace guitarist who has his own problems  he is attracted to a pretty girl, preeti (riya sen) but cannot muster the courage to talk to her. to make things worse, his father has decided that he is wasting his life and has given him an ultimatum  find a girl in two months or settle down with a wife his parents choose. rishi and deep, though they tease him mercilessly, grow very fond of neel, and he has a sure ally in shanti. shanti, meanwhile, is trying to get rishi to see sense and make up with nicky.
rishi and deep amidst hilarious situations eventually end up making neel talk to preeti, while also making sure they practice for the upcoming jhankaar beats competition. meanwhile, rishi gets a good offer to work outside the country but decides against it as he feels he wants to give another chance to him and nicky.
right before the competition, rishi sees nicky being comforted by her lawyer and decides that nicky doesn't want him any more, and takes up that job abroad. on the day of the competition, he is leaving for the airport, much to the anger and disappointment of deep, who had considered rishi a brother and is now leaving him. 
on the way to the airport, the taxi plays an r.d burman song on the radio and rishi realizes he is actually leaving his family. deep and neel on the way to the competition are surprised by rishi turning up, and they decide to do a cover of an r.d burman song for their performance, regardless of the outcome.
the film ends by showing deep, rishi and neal having won the competition finally, and forming a band. rishi eventually puts his ego aside and apologizes to nicky. deep becomes a father and names his son after their idol.


== cast ==
sanjay suri as deep
rahul bose as rishi
shayan munshi as indraneel "neel" kapoor
juhi chawla as shanti
shashikala as shanti's mother
rinke khanna as nicky
riya sen as preeti
archana puran singh as ms. voluptuous, rival company manager
parmeet sethi as divorce lawyer of nicky
vijayendra ghatge as mr. kapoor, neels father; rishi and deeps boss
ikraa khatri as muskaan
raja vaid as vijay
kurush deboo as mr. deboo, absent-minded divorced lawyer of rishi


== soundtrack ==
the music for all the songs were composed by vishal-shekhar and the lyrics for this film were by penned by vishal dadlani.


== sansui awards ==


== references ==


== external links ==
jhankaar beats at imdb