jhumroo is a 1961 indian hindi-language romantic comedy film directed by shankar mukherjee. it stars kishore kumar in the titular role along with madhubala. anoop kumar brother of kishore kumar and chanchal sister of madhubala also acted in this film. the screenplay is written by madhusudan kalekar, dialogue by vrajendra gaud and story by kishore kumar. it revolves around a wealthy girl who falls in love with a local tribal but her father disapproves of the match.   
jhumroo was released in january 1961 and the film as well as its soundtrack proved to be popular among the audience. it is counted among the last films to star celebrated actress madhubala. the soundtrack included singers such as asha bhosle, kishore kumar and usha mangeshkar.


== plot ==
anjana, a wealthy girl returns to her home after completing her education. here she meets jhumroo, a local tribal and falls in love with him. her father strongly disapproves of the match. it turns out that jhumroo's foster mother is the real mother of anjana. her father's best friend, whom her father had duped, is the real father of jhumroo.
watch the movie to find out how it all ends.


== cast ==
madhubala as anjana
kishore kumar as jhumroo
lalita pawar as kamli/kamla
jayant as dwarka nath
chanchal as chamki
anoop kumar as ramesh
sajjan as banno
m. kumar as bihari


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by kishore kumar. the music was arranged by s.d. burman's musical band. the song "koi humdum na raha" was a cover of the song of the same name, composed by saraswati devi for jeevan naiya (1936). and was sung by the actor  and occasional singer  ashok kumar. kishore kumar was five years old when he heard his elder brother ashok kumar sing "koi humdum na raha". twenty-five years later, when kishore kumar was composing the music for jhumroo, he went to his brother asking for permission to sing "koi humdum na raha" for his film. dadamoni, as ashok kumar was fondly referred to, tried to dissuade kishore, saying it was an intricate metre to compose. kishore joked, "i dont know about that but i will sing it and i will sing it better than you." and with that playful exchange of words, he created an immortal song. "koi humdum na raha" is often regarded as one of his best songs.lyrics of all songs written by majrooh sultanpuri, except 2 songs main hoon jhumroo & ruk tuk thum thum - both written by kishore kumar. 


== reception ==
in film geek's review, it was written that "jhumroo follows a set of conventions that are relatively ordinary for filmi romantic comedy." it praised the soundtrack of the film saying, "the songs keep coming fast and thick, and they are all well-crafted both musically and visually." writing about madhubala's performance, it stated that she is "genius at a gentle physical comedy that both gets out of kishore's way to let him own the screen."


== box office ==
jhumroo was released on january 27, 1961 and earned 11 million at the box office, generating a huge profit of 5.5 million for the producers. consequently the film was a commercial success and emerged as the eleventh highest-grossing film of 1961.


== references ==


== external links ==
jhumroo at imdb