jilebi  is a 2015 indian malayalam-language film directed by  arun shekhar for the producer east coast vijayan, starring jayasurya, ramya nambeesan and vijayaraghavan. the film released on 31 july 2015 to generally positive reviews.


== plot ==
jilebi is a story about confrontation between the middle aged sreekuttan and his city-bred nephews. sreekuttan is a villager whose life is confined to his farm and crops. far away in dubai, trouble brews for him in the form of his nephew and niece. from their first meeting, it becomes evident that both sreekuttan and the children are uncomfortable with the rustic setting. the only thing holding them down are their roots to the place. the tech-savvy kids are determined to make everyone around them miserable. soon enough their vacation comes to a close and they leave their family home with sreekuttan in charge to start school in kodaikanal. the road trip to their new school leads to surprises - some sour, some sweet for both alike. a bond develops between sreekuttan and the children. at school they meet silpa - the children's mother. she angrily lambasts sreekuttan and blames his village farming attitude and lack of responsibility for being late for admissions. sreekuttan puts silpa in her place for her snobbish attitude and reminds her money does not make relationships change their inherent values. later, understanding her mistake silpa lets her children attend school near the family house and flies back from dubai to thrissur.


== cast ==
jayasurya as sreekuttan
ramya nambeesan as shilpa
vijayaraghavan as chandradas silpa's father
shari as silpa's mother
k. p. a. c. lalitha as sreekuttan's mother
dharmajan bolgatty as tony
leema babu as reji (shilpa's colleague)
gourav menon as pachu (shilpa's son)
baby sayuri as ammu (shilpa's daughter)
minon john
disney james as vijay,  silpa's colleague
tony alex valluvassery as jithendra


== soundtrack ==
music by bijibal, lyrics by east coast vijayan, santhosh varma

"njaanoru malayalee" - p. jayachandran
"varika omale" - gayathri ashokan, najim arshad
"cycle vannu" - chorus


== references ==


== external links ==
jilebi at imdb
official website