jis desh mein ganga rehta hai (transl.the country where ganga lives) is 2000 indian hindi-language comedy film directed by mahesh manjrekar and starring govinda and sonali bendre as leads. it is a remake of the 1972 marathi film ekta jeev sadashiv, and the 1974 kannada film bangaarada panjara.


== plot ==
gangaram alias ganga (govinda) lives a simple, straightforward life in a small village with his mom and dad (shivaji satham and reema lagoo), and his girlfriend, saawni (sonali bendre).
when the time comes for ganga to marry, his parents inform him that his biological parents live in the city and want him to settle there. ganga bids tearful farewell to his village and its inhabitants and travels to the city of his birth parents. he finds that he has an elder brother, who is married to supriya, and younger siblings, as well as his birth parents, avinash (shakti kapoor) and radha (himani shivpuri), who are all very wealthy. ganga struggles to cope up with the modern city lifestyle. his sister-in-law dislikes him more as days pass by.
soon word spreads about ganga being the latest eligible bachelor. he is asked to marry a socialite, tina (rinke khanna), as per his parents' wishes. ganga agrees to everything his new-found family wants him to do. things get so bad for ganga that he runs away from his biological parents' home and finds his older brother being blackmailed by a woman and two goons. he saves his brother, but his best friend gets stabbed in the stomach by one of the goons who flees the scene; he gets accused for stabbing his own friend. ganga refuses to speak the truth about the incident at court as he does not want his family's reputation to be ruined. his sister-in-law, who learns the truth from her husband, speaks out at court and proves his innocence.
after the verdict, ganga and his best friend return to their village where he reunites with saawni. his parents agree to get them married.


== cast ==
govinda - gangaram
sonali bendre - saavni
rinke khanna - tina
ankush choudhary - rahul
milind gunaji - milind chauhan
supriya karnik - supriya
shivaji satam - gangaram's father
reema lagoo - gangaram mother
shakti kapoor - avinash
himani shivpuri - radha
kishore nandlaskar - sannata
anand abhyankar - tina father
nandu madhav - iqbal
atul kale - birbal,avinash's secretary
rajendra gupta - guest appearance in song "pren nagar me"
makarand anaspure
farhad shahnawaz
rakhi sawant
herman d'souza- villain rakhi sawant's brother


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack is on universal music, the music is composed by anand raaj anand, while the songs are written by dev kohli and praveen bhardwaj.


== references ==


== external links ==
jis desh mein ganga rehta hain at imdb