joanna is a 1968 british drama film, directed by michael sarne and set in swinging london. it was nominated for the  golden globe for best foreign language film.


== plot ==
joanna, a wide-eyed somewhat naive art student in london, has a romantic fling with her teacher, aspiring painter hendrik casson. she eventually leaves him for impoverished dominic, while her gold-digging friend beryl takes up with the quite wealthy lord sanderson.
they travel to sanderson's second home in morocco, where he reveals that he has a terminal illness and sponsors an exhibit of hendrik's paintings. meanwhile, dominic dumps joanna because she refuses to stop seeing other men.
joanna's next lover, beryl's brother gordon, impregnates her. beaten by criminals to whom he's in debt, gordon takes revenge by killing one. he is convicted of murder and sent to prison, leaving joanna alone.


== cast ==
genevive wate as joanna
christian doermer as hendrik casson
calvin lockhart as gordon
donald sutherland as lord peter sanderson
glenna forster-jones as beryl
david scheur as dominic endersley
marda vanne as granny
geoffrey morris as the father
michelle cook as margot
manning wilson as inspector
clifton jones as black detective
dan caulfield as white detective
michael chow as lefty
anthony ainley as bruce
jane bradbury as angela
fiona lewis as miranda de hyde


== production ==
sarne had an affair with wate during the making of the film and was physically violent towards her during filming; in a 1968 interview with new york magazine he said of hitting wate that it was "the only way to direct this girl, otherwise she's very cheeky. she has to be shown. i mean she knew that unless she behaved herself she'd get slapped down. one is polite to girls so long as they behave themselves" and that he "didn't punch her around as corrective punishment. only when she annoyed me".wate was paid 2,000 for her work on the film (equivalent to 34,941 in 2019).candice bergen filmed a small scene for the film but it was not included due to issues with the british actors union equity and 20th century fox.robert lacey highlighted joanna as an example of a british film that should have received financing from british rather than american companies in a 1968 article in the illustrated london news about film financing in the united kingdom. sarne said that "with an american company you're artistically free...to make a good film you need a touch of the romantic, a streak of the visionary, and you can't have that with your financier tripping over your heels all the time".


== premiere ==
it was listed to compete at the 1968 cannes film festival. the festival was cancelled due to the events of may 1968 in france. the film was still shown in an afternoon performance and a premier showing at cannes.


== box office ==
according to fox records, the film required $3,800,000 in rentals to break even, and by 11 december 1970 had made $1,900,000.


== references ==


== external links ==
joanna at imdb
joanna at allmovie
british film institute; joanna (1968)
glenna forster-jones in vintage euro tv commercial