johnnie walker (1992) is a malayalam film directed by jayaraaj and written by ranjith. mammootty appeared in the lead along with a set of youngsters. the story centres around a middle aged man who joins the same college that his younger brother studies at.


== plot ==
the film gets its title from mammootty's character, johnny varghese fondly known as johnnie walker because of his preference of the alcohol of the same name, the movie was named after an alcohol brand johnnie walker. he has a brother bobby varghese who studies in bangalore for a degree in economics. a visit from his brother and friends changes johnnie's mind and he joins college despite his age. from there he clashes with swamy who rules the college with his drug gang. because of his love towards his brother bobby, johnny joins his college as a student and they start living together. soon he becomes the hero of the college as well as rival to saamy and his gang. bobby falls in love with his classmate chandini, who was a depressed girl, as she was an adopted child to her parents. chandini was addicted to drugs by saamy and was hospitalised. johnny suffers from eyesight problems and realizes that he will soon lose his sight completely. because of this, he wants to see bobby's marriage and pleads to chandini's parents for the same. at last they agree after hearing his story. on the night of the marriage, bobby is killed by saamy and his gang. when johnny comes to know about his brother's death, he rushes towards saamy and didi, the leader of the gang and kills them. in the end, johnny loses his sight completely, meets with an accident and dies.


== cast ==
mammootty as johny varghese
ranjitha as mridula, lecturer
kamal gaur as swamy the drug dada of college
jeet upendra as bobby varghese
rani (tamil actress) as chandini
manian pilla raju as professor
sankaradi as principal
prem kumar as bobby's friend
gopal poojari as didi
thrissur elsy as hostel warden
sukumari as mridula's mother
abu salim
augustine as drug mafia member
hakim rawther as drug mafia member
kuthiravattom pappu as priest
prem prakash as coach mohana krishan
jagathi sreekumar as police constable
soman as doctor
t. s. krishnan as hassan
t. p. madhavan as chandini's father
robin verghese as shelly
neelakandan natrajan as kuttappayi


== music ==
all lyrics are written by gireesh puthenchery; all music is composed by s. p. venkatesh.the song shanthamee ratriyil was choreographed by prabhudeva , his malayalam debut.


== references ==


== external links ==
johnnie walker at imdb
kamal gaur return to 'm' town at toi