julie & julia is a 2009 american biographical comedy-drama film written and directed by nora ephron starring meryl streep, amy adams, stanley tucci, and chris messina. the film contrasts the life of chef julia child in the early years of her culinary career with the life of young new yorker julie powell, who aspires to cook all 524 recipes in child's cookbook in 365 days, a challenge she described on her popular blog, which made her a published author.ephron's screenplay is based on two books: my life in france, child's autobiography written with alex prud'homme, and a memoir by powell, julie & julia: 365 days, 524 recipes, 1 tiny apartment kitchen (later retitled julie & julia: my year of cooking dangerously). both of these books were written and published  between 2004 and 2006. powell's book was based on her blog the julie/julia project, where she documented online her daily experiences cooking each of the 524 recipes in child's 1961 and 1970 two volume cookbook mastering the art of french cooking. the film is the first major motion picture based on a blog.in march 2008, ephron began filming with streep as child and adams as powell. on july 30, 2009, the film officially premiered at the ziegfeld theatre in new york; and, on august 7, 2009, it opened throughout north america. it received positive reviews from critics, who praised streep's performance. streep and adams previously starred together in doubt (2008). streep and tucci previously starred together in the devil wears prada (2006).
julie & julia was ephron's last film before her death in 2012.


== plot ==

julia child  1950s
in the 1950s, julia child (streep), an enthusiastic and unabashed woman, moves to paris with her diplomat husband, paul child (tucci). she attends le cordon bleu to learn french cooking and is initially met with skepticism as she is the only woman in the class. madame elizabeth brassart (buck), the proprietress of the school and julia clash. however, she is undaunted and begins collaborating on a book about french cooking for american housewives with simone beck (emond) and louisette bertholle (carey).
julia continues to work diligently on the book, despite such obstacles as paul being repeatedly reassigned, louisette's less-than-diligent efforts on the project (she's eventually told she will get a smaller share of the royalties than julia and simone), and paul's being investigated for allegedly "un-american activities." 
although julia's book is rejected by houghton mifflin as too long and complicated, it is ultimately accepted and published by alfred a. knopf.
julie powell  2002
in 2002, julie powell (adams) is a young writer with an unpleasant job at the lower manhattan development corporation's call center, where she answers telephone calls from victims of the september 11 attacks and members of the general public complaining about the lmdc's controversial plans for rebuilding the world trade center. she is discontented with this and disheartened at watching her acquaintances succeed in their own professions. she is happily married to eric powell (messina), a writer for a magazine.
to do something she enjoys, she decides to cook every recipe in julia child's mastering the art of french cooking (1961) in one year; powell decides to write a blog to motivate herself and document her progress. she is initially met with criticism from her mother, who thinks that the task is pointless, but she begins to gain a following. eric supports her in this.
she is asked to host judith jones (dilly), who was child's editor. julie attempts to make beef bourguignon for the occasion but falls asleep while waiting for it to cook, and it burns. she reattempts it, this time successfully. however, jones cancels at the last minute due to the weather, leaving julie disheartened as she had hoped that her meeting with jones would lead to a book contract. eric remains optimistic, frustrating julie. he is hurt over julie's prioritization of her blog and readers over their marriage, and he leaves after an argument.
she takes a short break from cooking, but after her mother demonstrates support for her cooking, she decides to take it up again. eric returns after he reads her blog post in which she demonstrates remorse for her actions. julie is visited by the new york times, who features her blog in a story, after which her project begins to receive the attention of journalists, literary agents, and publishers. however, julie is hurt when a journalist tells her that child was critical of julie's blog project.
the last scenes shows powell and her husband visiting a reconstruction of child's kitchen at the smithsonian institution, and child in the same kitchen at her home receiving a first print edition of her cookbook and celebrating the event with her husband.


== cast ==


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
the film received positive reviews from critics, and streep's performance was highly acclaimed by critics. rotten tomatoes gave the film a score of 77% based on 227 reviews, with an average score of 6.71/10 with a "certified fresh" rating, and the site's critical consensus states: "boosted by meryl streep's charismatic performance as julia child, julie & julia is a light, but fairly entertaining culinary comedy." metacritic, which assigns a rating out of 100 top reviews from mainstream critics, gave it an average score of 66% based on 34 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".los angeles times critic kenneth turan commented, "[julie & julia] does it right. a consummate entertainment that echoes the rhythms and attitudes of classic hollywood, it's a satisfying throwback to those old-fashioned movie fantasies where impossible dreams do come true. and, in this case, it really happened. twice." the a.v. club gave the film a c, explaining, "julie & julia is two movies in one. that's one more movie than it needs to be." entertainment weekly gave it a b+. the review by slate was also positive.streep has been widely praised for her performance as child. movie critic a. o. scott of the new york times affirmed that "by now [streep] has exhausted every superlative that exists and to suggest that she has outdone herself is only to say that she's done it again. her performance goes beyond physical imitation, though she has the rounded shoulders and the fluting voice down perfectly." reviewer peter travers wrote in rolling stone that "streepat her brilliant, beguiling bestis the spice that does the trick for the yummy julie & julia." similarly, stephanie zacharek of salon concluded that "streep isn't playing julia child here, but something both more elusive and more truthfulshe's playing our idea of julia child."


=== box office ===
on its opening weekend, the film opened #2 behind g.i. joe: the rise of cobra with $20.1 million. julie & julia ended up grossing $94.1 million in the united states and canada, and earned a worldwide total of $129.5 million.


=== awards and nominations ===
 


== see also ==
julia's kitchen wisdom


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
julie & julia at imdb
julie & julia at allmovie
julie & julia at box office mojo
julie & julia at rotten tomatoes
julie & julia at metacritic
archive of original blog at the wayback machine (archived december 17, 2002)