jump is a 2009 hong kong comedy-drama film written and produced by stephen chow and directed by stephen fung. the film stars kitty zhang, leon jay williams and daniel wu with action choreography by yuen cheung-yan.


== plot ==
phoenix is a young peasant who dreams of becoming a dance star in the big city. one day, a previous resident of the town comes and offers ten slots at his factory to those interested. phoenix wins one, but she gives it to her best friend snow instead. they leave their town and travel to shanghai. snow takes a job in garment factory. phoenix accidentally gets a job there, too.
she sneaks out at night and takes another job as a janitor in a dance studio so she can learn enough to be in a hip hop street dance competition. after running into her several times, the owner of the studio helps her take dance classes. eventually, he (ron chan) begins to drop his playboy exterior and takes her out to dinner. one day though, phoenix catches him saying cruel things about her on the phone, although he tells her its just publicity. suspicious, she follows him to the airport and sees him meeting a woman there. phoenix flees back to her home, leaving ron and snow confused about where she went.
in her village, phoenix realizes that she has to follow her dreams no matter what and returns to shanghai in time for the dance competition. she steps in when one of the dancers sprains her ankle. despite phoenix's great dancing, the team loses to the korean team, south city crew. all her friends showed up to the competition though, and they reunite joyfully despite losing. a surprise addition to the party is the woman from the airport, who turns out to be ron's sister. phoenix and ron make up and end up together again.
during the credits, phoenix and her friends are seen returning to the village and teaching everyone to dance to hip hop. even the scarecrow is dressed in hip-hop clothing.


== cast ==
kitty zhang as phoenix
leon jay williams as ron chan
daniel wu as doctor (cameo)
yao wenxue
yuen cheung-yan
samuel pang
fung min-hun
lee sheung-ching
prudence kao
zhang jiangcui
lisa li


== production ==
edison chen had originally been cast as the lead actor but due to his 2008 photo scandal he was replaced by williams.


== references ==


== external links ==
jump at the hong kong movie database
jump at hong kong cinemagic
jump at imdb
jump review at lovehkfilm.com