just ask for diamond, alternatively titled diamond's edge, is a 1988 british comedy crime film directed by stephen bayly and starring colin dale, saeed jaffrey and dursley mclinden. it is based on the falcon's malteser (1986), the first book of the diamond brothers series written by anthony horowitz.


== plot summary ==
a pair of brothers are paid to take care of a confectionery box, but soon come under pressure from various people seeking its contents.
nick simple diamond is more like the brains than his detective brother herbert simple, aka tim diamond, inc. because when a dwarf enters with a secret package, nearly all the crooks in england are out to get tim and nick, and just because of a confectionary package. nick and tim soon break their promise to the dwarf, and open the secret package. soon they find out that the secret package actually is a box of malteasers. belonging to an international criminal named henry von falkenberg, or the falcon, a secret opening a very precious treasure belonging to the dead criminal.
later, the dwarf is found dead, and tim is blamed for it. nick spends time in jail with him, and they join old chief inspectors snape and boyle. soon they are threatened by criminals, sent to jail, wanted for murder, wanted for disturbance, nearly killed, kidnapped, given concrete trainers, bullied by punk criminals and invited by women who keep crocodiles for pets. if all these criminals are after a small box of chocolates, this must mean that it is a serious mystery the two have to solve, and this should be a case for tim diamond, but is it just him, or his is it his kid brother's help with succession, and together will the diamond brothers solve a crime that is tougher than thought?


== cast ==
saeed jaffrey - mr. patel
dursley mclinden - herbert timothy simple/tim diamond
jos ren ruiz - johnny naples (as rene ruiz)
michael robbins - fat man
donald standen - lawrence
patricia hodge - betty charlady / brenda von falkenberg
jim mcmanus - hammett
jimmy nail - boyle
roy kinnear - jack splendide
bill paterson - chief inspector snape
forbes collins - henry von falkenberg
peter eyre - gott
nickolas grace - himmell
susannah york - lauren bacardi


== references ==


== external links ==
just ask for diamond at imdb
just ask for diamond at box office mojo
just ask for diamond at rotten tomatoes