kaadhal  (tamil: : ),  (english: love) is a 1952 tamil romance film. the film was simultaneously released as telugu movie prema.the film was produced and directed by p. s. ramakrishna rao under the bharani studios banner. it stars a. nageswara rao and  p. bhanumathi in the lead roles, with music composed by c. r. subburaman. p. bhanumathi wrote the story for the first time.


== plot ==
raja (anr) accompanies his rich maternal uncle sundara rao (doraswamy) to a hill resort to help the latter recoup his health. there he falls in love with moti (bhanumathi), a tribal woman, and she too responds. a tribal goon parasuram (mukkamala) is after moti.
one night, sundara rao suddenly develops chest pain and raja rushes him to a city hospital. moti's parents, khaderao (k. v. subba rao) and mother bansi (surabhi kamala bai) fix her marriage with parasuram. moti manages to escape. meanwhile, raja returns to the village, and, on knowing that moti's marriage is being performed with parasuram, is dejected and leaves for the city. moti, who is now in the city with the hope of meeting raja, sees him with latha (sriranjani), daughter of sundara rao, and assumes they are married.
crestfallen, she runs madly in the streets and meets with a car accident. sivaswamy (csr), a beggar, saves her and takes her to his house. a drama contractor raoji (relangi) and his assistant (sivarao) take moti into their troupe and train her for the title role of sakunthala in their drama. raja and latha attend the drama. the two lovers, moti and raja exchange notes about their single status and their love blossoms again.
latha and sundara rao plot to separate them and succeed in their attempt. moti sacrifices her love for latha and leaves for her village. parasuram kills her when she refuses to yield to him and is in turn killed by her friend chimli. raja gets to know the truth from latha and rushes to the village to meet moti. latha follows him. both pay their homage to moti.


== cast ==
bhanumathi as mothi
nageswara rao as raja
mukkamala as parasuram
sriranjani jr. as latha
relangi as raoji
c. s. r. as sivaswami
siva rao as assistant
sooryakantham as chimili
duraiswami as sundara rao
surabhi kamalabai as bansi
k.v. subba rao as kate rao
a. l. narayana as watchman
k. s. angamuthu as jagathambal


== crew ==
producers: p. s. ramakrishna rao & p. bhanumathi
production company: bharani studios
director: p. s. ramakrishna rao
music: c. r. subburaman
story: p. bhanumathi
dialogues: udayakumar
lyrics: k. d. santhanam
art direction: k. nageswara rao
editing: v. s. narayanan
choreography: pasumarthi krishnamoorthi
cinematography: kamal ghosh


== soundtrack ==
music was composed by c. r. subburaman. lyrics were by k. d. santhanam. singers are p. bhanumathi, c. s. r. anjaneyulu & kasturi siva rao. playback singers are ghantasala, pithapuram nageswara rao, r. balasaraswathi devi & a. p. komala.
all the tunes for all the songs and singers for both languages are the same.
music released on hmv audio company.


== references ==


== external links ==
kaadhal film at imdb.
kaadhal at spicy onion
watch the song inba kaaviyam aagum vaazhve on youtube
watch the song jeevidhamellaam sweettaaga seiyyum on youtube