blind spot is a 1958 british drama film directed by peter maxwell and starring robert mackenzie, delphi lawrence, gordon jackson, john le mesurier, and michael caine.


== plot ==
laid up in a military hospital waiting for an operation, u.s. army captain dan adams (robert mackenzie), has lost his sight due to a head injury. while his doctors are waiting for his injury to heal before proceeding, adams is driven off the base to a party but is dropped off at the wrong address. 
entering the house, he stumbles over a body and startles the killers rushford (ronan o'casey) and schrieder (george pastell). realising adams is blind, they knock him out and throw him down a flight of stairs. when adams revives back in the same hospital, his tale of murder seems implausible, as no evidence of a crime is found.
after regaining his eyesight, adams finds himself framed on a diamond-smuggling charge. he sets out to track down the real thieves, pretending that he is still blind in order to catch them off guard. encountering an aircraft mechanic (gordon jackson) and the brent family, with father (john le mesurier) and sister (delphi lawrence), adams realises that a pilot thought to be dead is really johnny brent (michael caine) who knows more about the theft and murders. finally unravelling the mysterious death and smuggling operation, adams proves his innocence.


== cast ==


== production ==
principal location photography for blind spot took place at majestic hotel, kensington, london, england. studio shots were completed at walton studios, walton-on-thames, surrey, england.
blind spot is a remake of "blackout", a british crime drama (1950 film), by the same producers, but a different director.


== critical reception ==
tv guide gave blind spot one out of four stars, and wrote, "a few good turns, including the final chase, can't pep up a tired script;" while the radio times rated the film two out of five stars, calling it a "stolid british crime yarn."the movie scene gave the film three out of five stars, noting, "robert mackenzie appeared to make only three movies yet going on what he does as dan adams in 'blind spot' makes me think he could have had a solid movie career...after a decent set up "blind spot" quickly unravels into an ordinary 1950s crime drama with nothing to make it stand out except that it features a young michael caine."


== references ==


== external links ==
blind spot at imdb
blind spot at rotten tomatoes