kaazcha is a 2004 indian malayalam-language drama film written and directed by blessy, in his directorial debut. the story revolves around the boy pavan (yash) who reaches kerala after he loses everything in the 2001 gujarat earthquake. film projectionist madhavan (mammootty) happens to meet the boy and takes him with him. the movie was reported to be inspired by the 1986 iranian film bashu, the little stranger.


== plot ==
madhavan (mammootty), a simple village man who in childhood got bitten by the film bug, threw up his studies and finally ends up as projectionist madhavan, who tours the countryside with his 16 mm projector and shows films at temple festivals and other public functions. madhavan's family consist of his wife (padmapriya) and a daughter (sanusha). (innocent) enacts the role of a priest.  madhavan comes across a six-year-old boy (yash) who is displaced from his native gujarat and separated from his family after the devastating earthquake. this boy was taken into a gang of beggars from where he manages to escape. madhavan takes the boy home and cares for him, just like a son. he and his family takes a fondness for the boy, later finding out that legally he cannot adopt the boy. the boy is taken away from madhavan to a juvenile home and allegations of ill treatment is charged on madhavan, but soon dismissed. the issue gets media coverage.  madhavan then goes to gujarat with the boy in hopes of finding his family or adopting him. at the disaster camp in gujarat madhavan understands that the boys relatives are all most probably dead but due to legal hurdles, the boy must stay on in the hope that his real parents might be traced. madhavan dejected has to return to his family in kerala.


== cast ==
mammootty as madhavan
padmapriya janakiraman as lakshmi (voice dubbed by bhagalekshmi)
master abin as pavan aka kochundapri
sanusha as ambily
manoj k. jayan as joy
innocent as fr. kuriakose
augustine as suresh
venu nagavalli as magistrate
hakim rawther as man at film club society
t. s. raju as police officer
nedumburam gopi as madhavan's father
pala aravindan as mathai mapla-film distributor
binda as old mans' daughter
vyjayanthi as sreelatha menon


== notes ==
initially, actor vikram had been considered to play the lead role, who was later replaced by mammootty.
the film marked the debut of blessy as an independent director, and padmapriya as actress. it was also the debut of ranjith ambady, who was an assistant of pattanam rasheed.


== critical reception ==
sify gave a verdict "excellent" saying "the biggest asset of kazhcha is the
story and screenplay by blessy, (an
associate of lohithadas) which is
perfect. another plus point of the film is
the racy way in which the director has
been able to tell the story with right
mix of comedy and sentiments woven
into the plot." the critic praised mammootty for his "perfect comedy timing", also saying "mammooty is the heart and soul of the
film and he has proved once again that
no actor can match up to him in such
roles."


== soundtrack ==
except for the song jugunure, lyrics for all other songs were written by kaithapram damodaran namboothiri, while lyrics for jugunure were written by k.j.singh. all songs were composed by mohan sithara.


== awards ==
the film won 5 kerala state film awards for the year 2004. these are:

kerala state film award for best film with popular appeal & aesthetic quality   kaazhcha
kerala state film award for best debutant director -blessy
kerala state film award for best actor         mammootty
kerala state film award for best child artist  baby sanusha& master yashthe film won three filmfare awards south for the year 2004. these are

best film  kaazhcha
best director  blessy
best actor  mammoottythe film won five asianet film awards for the year 2004. these are

best film   kaazhcha
best actor  mammootty
best new face of the year (female)  padmapriya
best child artist  master yash
best cameraman - azhagappan


== references ==


== external links ==
kazhcha at imdb