kabhi na kabhi (lit.'sooner or later') is a 1998 indian hindi-language action film co-written and directed by priyadarshan. it stars jackie shroff, anil kapoor and pooja bhatt in pivotal roles. the film was produced by r. mohan in the banner of a malayalam film production company, shogun films. the film which began production in 1994 had a delayed release on 17 april 1998.


== plot ==
kachra seth runs an empire of collecting garbage, which is merely a front to cover-up for his other business  drug trafficking. he recruits a select group of people to carry out unpleasant tasks  such as beating someone up, or even killing someone. one of his recruits is jaggu, who will do anything for a price. jaggu loves tina but is afraid to tell her. when jaggu's mom is hospitalized, he comes to kachra for monetary assistance, he is assigned to a task instead, and unable to complete the task he is apprehended by the police with the assistance of a librarian, and is subsequently found guilty and sent to prison. jaggu's place is taken by rajeshwar alias raja, who is also attracted to tina and even rescues her from one of kachra's goons, chabiley, and they fall in love. when jaggu returns from prison, he finds his mom has died, and his sister missing, believed to have committed suicide. in anger, he concocts a fool-proof plan to kill the librarian, and does. jaggu does not know the librarian is none other than raja's dad, and raja swears to hunt down his dad's killer.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the score and soundtrack were composed a. r. rahman with lyrics by javed akhtar. rahman reused the song "anjali anjali" from 1994 tamil film duet as "mil gayee mil gayee" as per the director's request. this is the only song sung by kumar sanu for a. r. rahman.
reviewer of screen india said, "a. r. rahman spins another fizzy, frothy score for this long overdue film. this is vintage rahman  resolutely stub  born in style  yet, it makes for much pleasant listening." the soundtrack also proved popular upon release.the official track listing:the song "tu hi tu" was remastered as "manase manase" in the tamil movie nenjinile.
soundtrack(hindi) - kabhi na kabhi

soundtrack(tamil)  - monalisa


== references ==


== external links ==
kabhi na kabhi at imdb