kabhi haan kabhi naa (transl.sometimes yes, sometimes no) is a 1994 hindi-language indian coming-of-age romantic comedy film directed by kundan shah, starring shah rukh khan, suchitra krishnamurthy, deepak tijori and naseeruddin shah. this is one of the rare mainstream hindi movies in which the hero plays the role of a loser. it is widely considered to be one of shah rukh khan's best performances, and he has said that it is his favourite film. produced on a budget of 14 million, the film grossed 55 million (us$1.7 million), equivalent to 838 million (us$12 million) adjusted for inflation. at the 39th filmfare awards, it won the critics award for best film and the critics award for best actor for shah rukh khan, who also won the best actor award for baazigar at the same ceremony.
the film was remade in telugu as swapnalokam (1999). shah rukh khan has bought the rights to the film under his banner, red chillies entertainment. kabhi haan kabhi naa has also drawn comparisons to the later hollywood film 500 days of summer (2009).


== plot ==
sunil (shah rukh khan) is woken up from his dream of marrying the girl he loves, anna (suchitra krishnamurthy), by his sister (sadiya siddiqui).
sunil is a happy-go-lucky scamp who loves music and is not interested in studies, which bothers his father, vinayak (anjan srivastav). everyone has given up on sunil and thinks he is good for nothing except for father braganza (naseeruddin shah) who believes sunil is pure at heart.
sunil, anna, and chris (deepak tijori) are 3 members of a 6-person music band, who are looking to make it big. anna rejoins the group after being away for a while, which makes chris happy as he loves anna. after anna reenters his life, sunil begins to try and change his ways in order to get anna to fall in love with him.
during a performance at a friend's wedding, sunil notices the closeness between anna and chris. devastated, he decides to create a rift between them. sunil eventually gets caught in his own web of lies. a furious anna slaps him and decides to never talk to him again. sunil is thrown out of the band. however, fortune favors sunil who saves the band from being heckled at a local club by putting on a stellar show; the entire band forgives and forgets.
sunil thinks he has won anna back but finds out that anna and chris love each other and want to be married. crushed to pieces, sunil accepts he has lost in love.
meanwhile, anna's father decides that chris is worthy of marrying her. he makes his intentions known but chris' parents have other ideas and decide chris's marriage to their friend's daughter. anna and her family are dejected.
sunil consoles anna and the tide slowly turns in his favor. anna's father, having realized that sunil will love and take care of her, convinces anna to marry sunil. sunil is overjoyed until he realizes anna still loves chris. sunil decides to reunite the two and get them married. on their wedding day, as chris and anna are about to exchange rings, chris drops his ring and it rolls out of sight. sunil spots the ring but feigns ignorance, even as his younger sister gazes at him with a heavy heart. eventually, chris locates the ring and the couple gets married.
just after the wedding, sunil is shown sitting on the sidewalk, dejected, and heartbroken. by happenstance, a random girl (juhi chawla), who is lost and is seeking directions, approaches sunil. sometime later, sunil and the girl are seen walking in the moonlight and talking merrily.
anthony and vasco, two criminals who are a part of the story, see sunil with the new girl and break the fourth wall, saying that sunil will be alright. the criminals hear the police siren and immediately scamper away as the credits roll.


== cast ==
shah rukh khan as sunil
suchitra krishnamurthy as anna
deepak tijori as chris
naseeruddin shah as father braganza
ashutosh gowarikar as imran
kurush deboo as yezdi, sunil's best friend
aditya lakhia as tony
satish shah as simon, anna's father
anita kanwal as chris's mother
rita bhaduri as mary gonsalves
ravi baswani as albert gonsalves
anjan srivastav as vinayak, sunil's father
shashi sahay as prabha, sunil's mother
sadiya siddiqui as nikki, sunil's sister
ajit vachani as charles, chris's father
goga kapoor as anthony gomes, the don
virendra saxena as vasco, anthony's right-hand man
tiku talsania as patel, the bar owner
juhi chawla (special appearance)


== music ==
the music was composed by jatinlalit, while the lyrics were penned by majrooh sultanpuri. the song "sachi ye kahani hai" derives from two songs: boney m.'s "rasputin" (1978), and johnny wakelin's "in zaire". kabhi haan kabhi naa sold over 800,000 soundtrack albums in india.


== accolades ==


=== filmfare awards ===
critics award best movie  kundan shah
critics award for best actor  shah rukh khan


== references ==


== external links ==
kabhi haan kabhi naa at imdb