kabzaa (transl.the capture) is a 1988 bollywood crime action drama film starring raj babbar, sanjay dutt and paresh rawal. this movie is heavily based on the 1954 american classic on the waterfront starring marlon brando. scripted by salim khan and directed by prominent indian film director mahesh bhatt the film received positive reviews from the critics but failed to create a big impact at the box office. over the years it has garnered a cult following. bhatts reused the same theme in their 1998 film ghulam starring aamir khan and directed by vikram bhatt.


== plot ==
ravi verma (sanjay dutt) is a careless boy who lives with his elder brother ranjit verma (raj babbar). ranjit is a lawyer and works for veljibhai soda (paresh rawal), who is a criminal. veljibhai has an order to forcefully acquire a land which belongs to a freedom fighter ustad ali mohammed (alok nath). ali mohammed wants to build up a children's park at that site. ravi somehow gets into the picture and veljibhai asks him to go there and warn ali mohammed to leave the land immediately. ravi is suffering from brain tumor and while throwing things out of ali mohammed's house, he falls on the floor. ali mohammed takes him to the hospital. when ravi gains consciousness, he realizes that he had been doing wrong and changes his mind.
he realizes his duties and now wants to save ali mohammed's land at any cost from veljibhai. veljibhai, on realizing this, takes the onus upon himself to capture the land in his own hands. he gets ali mohammed killed in the process. ali mohammed has handed over the ownership of land to ravi in his deed. veljibhai asks ravi to hand over the deed papers in ransom for his brother, ranjit. ranjit however tries to get the papers back but is killed by veljibhai. now ravi has everything to go against veljibhai and not let his plans succeed. but veljibhai is clever enough to kidnap his love rita (amrita singh). ravi rescues rita and kills veljibhai not before he is shot with four bullets, but saves himself by crawling towards phone booth to call ambulance. the ambulance arrives and in the hospital, ravi is saved, along with the removal of his brain tumor. he gets the children's park built in ali mohammed's land as per his last wish.


== cast ==
raj babbar ... ranjit verma
sanjay dutt ... ravi verma
amrita singh ... rita
dimple kapadia ... dr. smita
aloknath ... ustad ali mohammed
paresh rawal ... veljibhai soda
nilu phule ... mandar bhagawat


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film was composed by rajesh roshan and the songs were written by anand bakshi.


== external links ==
kabzaa at imdb