kachche dhaage (transl.fragile bonds) is a 1999 indian hindi-language action thriller film directed by milan luthria and starring saif ali khan, ajay devgn and manisha koirala. the film features devgan as a smuggler, delivering goods across the rajasthan-pakistan border, was filmed in the deserts of rajasthan and in switzerland. it premiered on 19 february 1999 in mumbai.


== plot ==
dhananjay (saif ali khan) and aaftab (ajay devgn) are two half-brothers who meet for the first time. each one has a selfish approach to life; aaftab is a petty smuggler, specializing in smuggling goods across the rajasthan border into pakistan whilst dhananjay is a corporate yuppy from the city, with a high-flying lifestyle. aaftab is in love with rukshana (manisha koirala) but is rejected by her family because he is illegitimate. dhananjay is dating ragini (namrata shirodkar) and has his father's death to contend with.
when the brothers meet for the first time, they instantly loathe each other, having nothing in common. one night, aaftab blows up a loaded truck while trying to steal from it and attracts a mass of unwanted enforcers. soon, aaftab is forced to send dhananjay into a trap but ends up with them both being handcuffed and escaping from the border security force, the central bureau of investigation, and the border mafia who are attempting to incriminate the brothers for anti-national activities and murder. fate has it such that they are forced to escape on foot, on motorbikes, cars, stolen trucks, and even handcuffed to each other on a moving goods train. they run into difficult circumstances on the run, not in the least made better by their hatred for each other.  despite their initial differences, the two gradually learn to like and understand each other, eventually proving their innocence.
the climax of this film was shot around jaisalmer, especially in kuldhara, the deserted village of paliwal brahmins.


== cast ==
saif ali khan as dhananjay pandit 'jai'
ajay devgn as aftab
manisha koirala as rukhsana
sadashiv amrapurkar as cbi officer jadeja
namrata shirodkar as ragini pandit
govind namdeo as rana baikunth
maya alagh as mariam
anupam shyam as ramakant pandit
vineet kumar as bhagta
anu kapoor as kawali singer (cameo appearance) in is shaan-e-karam ka kya kehna
parmeet sethi (cameo appearance) in khali dil nahi
simran (cameo appearance) in khali dil nahi
mahavir shah as dhananjay's lawyer chinoi
rajeev verma as justice nariman sorabji
rajesh vivek as noora the terrorist
ishrat ali as maulvi


== production ==
the film marked the first collaboration between ajay devgn and saif ali khan.
akshay kumar was offered the role of jai but he rejected the role due to date issues. farida jalal was the original choice to play mariam. she said that she will portray the role if the film makers will change the character name of mariam to another name. as the producer of the film disagreed, the role went to maya alagh. mayuri kango was approached for ragini's role.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
the film received a mediocre reception. the film was described as having a weaker climax than some of the earlier action sequences although was praised for its scenery in switzerland and northwestern india. suparn verma of rediff.com described devgan as "effective" but disapproved of koirala's performance, believing it was wasted. verma noted a similarity with that of soldier in that there is a troubled hero, a great many red herrings and a mysterious villain who pulls all the strings but believed that kachche dhaage was a weaker film because it lacked the pace and focus.


=== box office ===
the film was a box office success grossing 277 million at the domestic box office.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack, which featured a number of punjabi folk tunes, proved popular amongst non hindi audiences of the film. the music was composed by ustad nusrat fateh ali khan, with lyrics by anand bakshi. the song "tere bin nahin jeena" sung by lata mangeshkar is a cover version of nusrat fateh ali khan's famous qawwali song "tere bin nahin lagda".
"band lifafa dil mera"  lata mangeshkar, kumar sanu
"ek jawani teri"  kumar sanu, alka yagnik
"upar khuda aasmaan neeche"  female  lata mangeshkar
"upar khuda aasmaan neeche"  male  sukhwinder singh
"dil pardesi ho gaya"  lata mangeshkar, kumar sanu
"khali dil nahi"  alka yagnik, hans raj hans
"pyar nahi karna" -kumar sanu, alka yagnik
"is shaan-e-karam ka kya kehna"  ustad nusrat fateh ali khan
"tere bin nahin jeena"  lata mangeshkar


== references ==


== external links ==
kachche dhaage at imdb