kadhalukku mariyadhai (transl.respect for love) is a 1997 indian tamil-language musical romantic drama film directed by fazil. it is a remake of fazil's own malayalam film aniyathipravu (1997). the film stars vijay and shalini (reprising her role from the original) with sivakumar, srividya, manivannan, charle, and radha ravi playing supporting roles. kadhalukku mariyadhai covers the story of a couple of differing backgrounds and beliefs and how they unite amidst the opposition of their families.
the music was composed by ilaiyaraaja with cinematography by anandakuttan. kadhalukku mariyadhai was released on 19 december 1997 and received a positive reception, praising the performances of the lead couple, vijay and shalini.


== plot ==
jeevanantham (vijay) is a very rich young man. although his parents (chandrasekhar (sivakumar) and srividya) want him to settle down, he goes to another city to do his mba and stays with friends.
during this time, he meets mini (shalini) in a bookstore, and they fall in love. she reciprocates his feelings after a few encounters, but trouble comes in the form of her tyrannical trio of brothers - james (radha ravi), thomas (thalaivasal vijay), and stephen (shaji khan) - who are overprotective of their sister and take an irrational dislike to jeeva. they show hostility towards jeeva, and conflicts begin to arise within their households.
when the couple decides to elope, they go to kesavan's (charle) hometown, and his father (manivannan) refuges them before the proposed wedding. jeeva tries to convince his mother one last time and in vain. on the day of the wedding, they both realize that they miss their families. they decide to return home, relinquishing their feelings, and the families are happy to take them back. jeeva's mother wants to see mini so that she can get a better wife for her son and goes to meet mini. initially reluctant to welcome them, the brothers hesitate, but their mother welcomes them. ultimately, their families accept their love, and they are reunited.


== cast ==
vijay as jeevanantham (jeeva)  a rich young mba student who falls in love with mini yet is initially misunderstood and disliked by her brothers.
shalini as mini  a young woman raised with christian beliefs who falls in love with jeeva. she is devoted to her family even after all the misunderstandings that went on with her and jeeva.
srividya as jeeva's mother  jeeva's caring and protective mother who loves her son unconditionally.
sivakumar as chandrasekhar, jeeva's father  jeeva's strict dad who initially wants him to settle down with a girl of his parents' choosing.
charle as kesavan  one of jeeva's friends who attends the same mba program as him.
dhamu as raghavan  another one of jeeva's friends who attends the same program as him.
radha ravi as james, mini's brother  a doctor and one of mini's three brothers who dislikes jeeva.
thalaivasal vijay as stephen, mini's brother  a police constable and another one of mini's brothers who roughly beats up the trio.
shaji khan as thomas, as mini's brother  the youngest of mini's brothers who also beats up the trio.
manivannan as kesavan's father  the leader of a fisherman hamlet who takes in jeeva, mini, and their friends and tries to get them married.
kpac lalitha as mini's mother
poornima as latha, mini's friend
kaka radhakrishnan
saranya mohan (child artist)
maghima devi as mrs. james


== production ==
initially, fazil was keen on casting a debutant in the lead female role, but shalini insisted that she should also star in the tamil version. fazil initially approached abbas for the lead role, but due to mismanagement created by abbas' manager with call sheets, vijay was selected for the lead role. filming took place in and around chennai, coimbatore, pollachi, rajakkad, pondicherry, palakkad, ernakulam and thiruvananthapuram.


== release ==


=== critical reception ===
the film opened in 19 december 1997 to unanimously positive reviews. a reviewer from the hindu mentioned that "vijay brings to surface the soft nature of the love", while adding that the rest of the cast makes "fine contributions", and praising the director's work. another critic from indolink.com recommending the film and citing that "shalini returns in this film with a good performance" and that ilaiyaraaja music is "unbelievable". he also goes on to praise the performance of the other lead actors and fazil's direction. indiaglitz wrote: "from the very title, to the climax, this movie is a stellar piece in the moviedom. turning out to be a path breaking flick for ilayathalapathy vijay [..] this movie set to be an inspiration for many of the successful love stories of the present day. new straits times wrote "this is a movie for the whole family".the film saw vijay win the tamil nadu state film award for best actor alongside parthiban in 1997, while pazhani bharathi also picked up the tamil nadu state film award for best lyricist for his work in the film.another remake was soon made in hindi as doli saja ke rakhna. the film was directed by priyadarshan and also repeated the same magic of the tamil version. the success of the film prompted director fazil to make another film with the lead pair in 2000, kannukkul nilavu,  which was moderately successful despite an equally positive reception.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack has been scored by ilaiyaraaja was well received by the audience. the lead actor, vijay, sung the song "oh baby" for this movie. lyrics written by palani bharathi.


== awards ==


== legacy ==
in aasaiyil oru kaditham (1999), vivek sings "ennai thalatta varuvala" and imitates vijay's dance steps. the song inspired a 2003 film of the same name which featured ajith kumar in a cameo appearance.entertainment portal behindwoods placed the film in first place in "top 20 best films of vijay" and also placed in "top 20 best love stories in tamil". scenes from the film was spoofed in thamizh padam (2010). shiva and a girl will be taking the same book "love and love only" in a same way similar to the pair in the film, but shock awaits as the girl turns out to be married. in "romeo juliet" (2015) the director will portray all the old cult classic love movies initially, and this movie will also be included in that list.


== references ==


== external links ==
kadhalukku mariyadhai at imdb