kaho naa... pyaar hai (transl.say it... you're in love) is a 2000 indian hindi-language musical romantic thriller film directed by rakesh roshan, marking the debuts of his son hrithik roshan and ameesha patel.
receiving the highest gross of the year in india , kaho naa.. pyaar hai was the most successful bollywood film of 2000 only after mohabbatein.  following its release, hrithik, who plays a double role in the film as rohit and raj, became an overnight superstar. his successful debut was termed 'hrithik mania' by the media, and he has been known as the "millennial superstar" ever since.kaho naa.. pyaar hai went on to be inducted into the guinness world records (2002) for being a feature film with the most awards wona total of 92 awards received in numerous ceremonies and categories. likewise, the film would be added to the limca book of records (2003) for the greatest number of awards won by a bollywood film. as director and producer, rakesh roshan collected his first ever filmfare award, while his son became the only actor ever to win both the filmfare award for best debut and the filmfare award for best actor for the same film.
following the success of kaho naa... pyaar hai, the father-son duo have gone on to collaborate in many more films, including koi... mil gaya (2003), krrish (2006), kites (2010), krrish 3 (2013), and kaabil (2017).
the movie is based on the 1986 kannada movie ratha sapthami.


== plot ==
rohit and his younger brother amit are orphans living in india with their lovable aunt and uncle, lily and anthony. rohit is an aspiring singer who works as a salesman in a car showroom, run by malik. one day, he meets sonia saxena, the beautiful daughter of wealthy mr. saxena, malik's friend, when he visits her to deliver the car her father brought. unknown to everyone, malik is running a drug cartel with the help of two corrupt police officers.
rohit and sonia meet again during her birthday party on the beach. after rohit sings for sonia, he is invited to perform on a cruise. rohit and sonia become drunk during the celebrations and fall into a lifeboat that separates from the ship. rohit rows to an island, where they are stranded for a couple of days. during this time, they continue to fight and eventually fall in love. they are rescued by saxena, who does not approve of their love due to their class differences. rohit is consequently fired from his job by malik. he convinces saxena that his intentions are honourable and saxena agrees that if rohit can become successful, he will allow him to marry sonia. determined to prove himself, rohit and his friends attempt to procure a record deal for him. rohit eventually becomes a locally well-known artist and prepares to put on a concert.
on the day of the show, rohit witnesses the corrupt policemen and malik shooting and killing a commissioner, who had found out about their drug dealings. they discover rohit's presence and shoot at him, wounding him before pursuing him over a bridge. saxena is also revealed to be part of the drug cartel and orders rohit's death. they knock his bike off-track, causing him to fall into the river below. rohit, who doesn't know how to swim, drowns and dies. the police are sent to search the ocean but are unsuccessful in finding his body. amit is traumatized by the news and becomes mute. rohit's family and friends are devastated while sonia goes into depression.
saxena sends sonia to stay with his brother in new zealand to help overcome her depression. there, she meets her cousin neeta's friend, raj chopra, who, to her immense shock, strikingly resembles rohit, though their personalities are slightly different. raj falls for sonia but she avoids him, due to reminding her of rohit. upon learning her story, raj accompanies sonia back to india and gives her hope to keep living, before deciding to let her go, as she does not love him. however at the airport, one of the corrupt officers spots them and opens fire on raj. after raj and sonia escape, raj realizes that somebody is mistaking him for rohit, and the two realize that rohit was murdered.
raj is welcomed by rohit's family and friends. his presence brings amit out of his shell, and raj learns that amit witnessed rohit's murder and saw the culprits. the gang decides to set a trap to expose the killers, with raj posing as rohit to lure them out while amit is to identify the guilty men. during this time, raj confesses to sonia that he loves her. malik, saxena, and the officers panic upon learning that "rohit" is alive. raj performs a concert in tribute to rohit, knowing his killers will come, although malik and the officers arrive at the concert disguised. saxena is reunited with his daughter and learns about the plan. he calls malik and tells him who "rohit" really is and not to fire. after the performance, rohit reveals to the crowd details of the shooting that he learned from amit. before he can reveal the names of the killers, one of the officers shoots him, causing panic in the audience, although raj is saved due to wearing a bullet-proof jacket. saxena tries to chastise malik, who counterpoints that saxena is trying to conspire with sonia to trap them all.
to catch who they believe is rohit, the officers kidnap sonia. raj arrives at the place where she is being held. he fights the corrupt police officers and beats each of them to death, saving sonia. malik arrives and reveals his motive for mercilessly pursuing raj and sonia but is fatally shot by saxena before he can reveal his involvement. amit recognizes malik as one of rohit's killers.
raj later learns that saxena was the man malik called before killing rohit through malik's phone. on being confronted, saxena confesses his crime to his daughter and raj before being arrested. as raj is about to leave to help amit resettle back into life, sonia confesses that she loves him and does not want to lose her love again, as she already lost rohit. the couple return to new zealand, taking everybody with them, and they get married with the blessings of their families.


== cast ==
hrithik roshan as rohit, an aspiring singer from a lower-middle-class background in india (sonia's love interest) / raj chopra, an nri billionaire businessman and singer residing in new zealand (sonia's husband).
ameesha patel as sonia saxena (rohit's love interest) / sonia raj chopra (raj's wife)
anupam kher as mr. saxena / sirjee (sonia saxena's father), and the main antagonist of the film, who then surrenders to the police
dalip tahil as shakti malik, atul's father, mr. saxena's cousin, and the second main antagonist of the film.
mohnish behl as inspector dilip kadam, a corrupt officer in saxena's payroll
ashish vidyarthi as inspector satish shinde, a corrupt officer in saxena's payroll
satish shah as anthony rodriques uncle, rohit's landlord
farida jalal as lily anthony rodriques aunty, rohit's landlady
rajesh tandon as atul malik, shakti's son, and sonia's friend
asha patel as mrs. chopra, raj's mother.
tannaz irani as neeta saxena / sonia's cousin and raj's friend (guest appearance)
vrajesh hirjee as tony, rohit's friend
abhishek sharma (actor) as amit, rohit's younger brother
johnny lever as inspector parab (cameo appearance)
ram mohan as police commissioner
payal malhotra as shobhna, a girl on the cruise ship
dimple inamdar as dancer
jasveer kaur as dancer


== production ==
the film was launched in 1998 with hrithik roshan and kareena kapoor as the lead actors. however, the latter walked out a few days after the launch, following a "misunderstanding" between the director rakesh roshan and kareena's mother babita. rakesh, who had known ameesha patel's family for a long time, cast her in the role.the ship scenes were filmed aboard the star flyer. the island scenes were filmed in krabi, thailand, in the area near khao phing kan (popularly known as james bond island).


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
the performance of hrithik was well praised, and the music received positive reviews. most critics noted the storyline was clichd. planet bollywood's alok kumar said "i'm telling you all to go see knph, a movie with which i had low expectations. the film ended up being very entertaining." ajay chaturvedi of apunkachoice.com said "the film suffers from a bad script." but he praised the performance and dancing of hrithik saying, "the highlight ... is hrithik roshan who has good screen presence, he has acted quite well considering that this is his debut film and he is a brilliant dancer." he praised the music saying "it is a big plus with "na tum jano na hum" and "ek pal ka jeena" being the pick of the lot."the reviewer for filmfare rated it 3.5 out of 5, and wrote, "rakesh roshan has come up with a winner. a racy script, excellent product values and taut editing result in a storyline that keeps the audience hooked throughout. the music is also good, especially the title song and numbers such as "ek pal ka jeena" and "chand sitaare." hrithik is very good in the action and dance sequences, and proves his acting calibre in his very first film. ameesha too performs well."sabiha kalolwala of the indian express wrote, "rakesh roshan has been smart enough to make a film which encompasses all the facets of acting  drama, action, romance, thrill, comedy and tragedy, all of them enacted pretty well by hrithik roshan." of the soundtrack, he wrote, "there is not even one song which is not enjoyable." anupama chopra, reviewing the film for india today wrote, "... rakesh has taken the routine love-story, added a thriller twist and narrated it with style. knph isn't about path-breaking craft, it's about blockbuster presentation. rakesh's sweat and money are apparent in every frame." she concluded writing, "what doesn't work is the tired villain track. kher, one of bollywood's finest, hams from frame 1. perhaps the idea of playing disgruntled papa yet again was too tedious. his post-climax repenting is almost comical. the rest of the gang isn't much better. the plot is as stale as the performances." kanchana suggu of rediff.com called the film a "great entertainer" and wrote, "one must say rakesh roshan knew what he was doing when he cast hrithik as the lead. the boy is good. the ease and style with which he dances, emotes, fights, makes one forget this is his debut film. hes had to essay two different characters, and hes done justice to both." also commending the performances of other actors, she wrote praises of other departments in that the "music is good, the songs are catchy, the cinematography is appealing, the direction is unobtrusive and the story is actually 'different'."the interval twist of the movie - where the hero supposedly dies in an accident - and the second half of the movie - where the heroine is sent out of her hometown to her uncle's place in order to overcome her depression but is shell shocked to find a lookalike in a vehicle nearby and later catches a glimpse of him again in a discotheque dancing merrily - was reported to be based on the 1986 kannada movie ratha sapthami.


=== box-office ===
in india, kaho naa... pyaar hai was the highest-grossing bollywood film of 2000. when adjusted for inflation, it was the 11th highest-grossing bollywood film of all time as of 2011, and the sixth highest-grossing film of the 2000s.


== soundtrack ==
the film's music was composed by rajesh roshan with lyrics by ibrahim ashk, saawan kumar tak and vijay akela. most of the songs were sung by lucky ali, udit narayan and alka yagnik the dancing sequences were choreographed by farah khan.
the film's soundtrack album became the second best-selling bollywood soundtrack of the year, selling about 10 million units.


== awards ==


== in popular culture ==
there is a movie called na tum jaano na hum, which was named after a song from this film, also starring hrithik roshan.


== see also ==

list of highest-grossing bollywood films


== references ==


== external links ==
kaho naa... pyaar hai at imdb
kaho naa... pyaar hai at rotten tomatoes
kaho naa... pyaar hai on facebook