kalki is a 1996 tamil drama film directed by k. balachander, starring shruti, rahman, prakash raj, geetha, renuka, and fathima babu. the music composition is by deva. the film was co-produced by gramco films. the film was among 1996 deepavali releases.


== plot ==
chellammaa (geetha), a singer, is wedded to a chauvinistic, sadistic industrialist named prakash (prakash raj). she is unable to beget a child and hence is the target of hurting words from prakash and his mother. when he prohibits her from singing, it is the last straw for her, and they divorce. prakash marries karpagam (renuka), a doormat wife, while chellammaa stays single, with a cook named kokila (newsreader fathima babu in her first movie appearance) around to help her. kalki (shruti) works in an ad agency and is relentlessly pursued by coworker and model paranjothi (rahman). she not only rejects him but also debunks love and sentiments. chellammaa becomes friends with kalki after a few encounters, and kalki moves in as a paying guest. however, she strikes up a friendship with prakash, and as the result of an affair with him, she ends up bearing his child. kalki makes him understand what he was doing to his wife by treating him like the way he treats his wife. during the time of delivery, karpagam, with her lawyer, threatens prakash that she is going to divorce him. however, upon realizing the mistakes that he did, he asks sorry to karpagam and asks for a chance to change himself. she agrees with a condition not to hurt kalki's child and also to live with kalki. prakash agrees to both the conditions. when they meet kalki and inform this, kalki says that she does not want to live with them as well as she is not ready to give the child to them. before delivery, she meets chellamma and informs that she did live with prakash to teach him a lesson and had a child just for chellamma and leaves the child with chellamma after delivery. after that, the society is not ready to accept her, so she goes to paranjothi, who is waiting for her and confesses her love for him.


== cast ==
shruti as kalki
rahman as paranjothi
prakash raj as prakash
geetha as chellammaa
renuka as karpagam
fathima babu as kohila
m. n. rajam
kathadi ramamurthy
priyadarshini as kalki's friend
thalaivasal vijay
vasuki
mohan v. raman
baby anu
k. s. ravikumar as a lawyer (special appearance)
k. balachander as a movie director (special appearance)
suvalakshmi as an actress (special appearance)


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by deva and lyrics were written by ilandevan.


== awards ==
filmfare awards south- best actress - shruti
tamil nadu state film awards - best actress - shruti


== references ==


== external links ==
kalki at imdb