kalloori vaasal (transl.college gate) is a 1996 indian tamil-language romantic comedy film directed by pavithran. it featured prasanth, ajith kumar, devayani and pooja bhatt in the lead roles.


== plot ==
vasanth (ajith kumar) and sathya (prashanth) are best friends since childhood. manivannan is working under sathya's mother and he wants his daughter pooja (pooja bhatt) to marry sathya so that he would be wealthy for the rest of his life. for this he makes many tricks and pranks to make them walk together alone, to go for a ride and many more. on vasanth's birthday sathya goes to wish him but he denies his wish and says his birthday means nothing to him anymore. simultaneously sathya's mother decides that her son is to marry pooja and the engagement day arrives. without informing her, when she enters the house as all the other guests did, manivannan insists that she wear the engagement saree. knowing the situation she leaves the place crying and sathya follows her. in the middle of the street he shouts at her and asks the reason why she can't marry him. she immediately shows her mangala sutra (wedding thread) which she has hidden from everyone and reveals that she is already married.
flashback begins with nivetha (devayani) and pooja being best friends from school and on the first day of college nivetha meets vasanth and falls in love. unaware of this, pooja and vasanth loved each other. when pooja came to know about the love of her friend for vasanth, she decided to sacrifice her love. on vasanth's birthday she denied her love for him and quickly he forcefully married her. seeing this, nivetha committed suicide before their eyes. pooja got separated from vasanth thinking that he was the reason behind her friend's death.
after knowing this sathya goes on to have a fight with vasanth. but after knowing the truth, sathya decides to sacrifice his love for pooja and decides to unite vasanth and pooja. on a cultural day when sathya, vasanth and pooja give a combined performance, the opposite gang led by manivannan makes a vengeful plan against vasanth and stabs him. the blame is then put on sathya who ends up in jail. when pooja sees her husband get hurt, she forgets everything and starts to cry for him. then as soon as vasanth becomes conscious, he and pooja finally are united.


== cast ==
ajith kumar as vasanth
prashanth as sathya
pooja bhatt as pooja
devayani as nivetha
manivannan as kumarasamy, pooja's father
kalyan as milton
kavitha as sathiya's mother
tiruppur ramasamy as ramasamy


== production ==
the film featured choreographer kalyan in his acting debut as a college rogue. this was the only tamil film which pooja bhatt had acted so far. in an interview, ajith mentioned that he became good friends with the lead actress, pooja bhatt, despite initially finding her "aloof". during the production of the film, prashanth was unhappy about the way that his character was depicted and his father thyagarajan was involved in a spat with the director over the issue. prashanth sported a ponytail for his role in the film.


== soundtrack ==
the film score and the soundtrack were composed by film composer deva. the soundtrack, released in 1996, features 6 tracks.


== release ==
the film opened on 18 february 1996 to mixed reviews with a critic claiming it is "supposed to be aimed at the college audience, but the way the story is, it does not seem to reach them". the film didn't perform well at the box office. the film was later dubbed and released in telugu as college gate and hindi as poojaa i love you.


== references ==


== external links ==
kalloori vaasal at imdb