kamaal dhamaal malamaal is a 2012 bollywood comedy-drama film directed by priyadarshan. it stars nana patekar, shreyas talpade and paresh rawal. the film has been produced by percept picture company. the story is adapted from malayalam film marykkundoru kunjaadu written by benny p. nayarambalam. it was released on 28 september 2012. this film is the reboot of the 2006 comedy film malamaal weekly.


== plot ==
the insinuating cry of every man, woman and child in this village when they see johnny belinda (shreyas talpade) is all about it. afraid of everything and everyone, johnny is one terrified soul. born into the household of david (om puri), a local farmer and being the only son, johnny does what he's best at to help his ailing father. nothing, other than buying lottery tickets every week. the only thing going in his life is his love for maria (madhurima) the daughter of the village's biggest gangster, paresh rawal, and sworn enemy of david. peter (paresh rawal), armed with three herculean sons, goes to all ends to make sure maria and johnny never marry, until one day, hope comes in the form of a silent, strong but always-hungry man, kallu a.k.a. sam (nana patekar).
one sudden day, johnny and his family find kallu in their well. they get him out and feed him dinner. next day, kallu and johnny go to the market, where peter's sons were beating johnny. kallu saves johnny and beats the goons in return. a friend of johnny's asks him if kallu is his lost brother, sam. with the question, johnny gets an idea to have kallu act as his brother and bodyguard. johnny convinces kallu to be his brother sam and tells him the story of his family history. johnny introduces kallu to his family. the family, in long wait of their lost son, accepts kallu as their lost son, sam.
kallu assumes the identity of sam. with the help of his brother sam, johnny starts influencing the entire village. sam also works hard in the farm and helps the family earn good livelihood. he is well accepted in the family. with the arrival of sam, good days come to the family. one day, a person tells johnny's friend that he has seen kallu in a kolkata jail, convicted of rape and murder of a woman. johnny tries to convinces his family that kallu is not sam but a rapist and murderer. david, however, says that sam has already told him the story of his going to jail. johnny asks sam to tell one thing which he has not told of sam as part of his family history. sam asks for a mango tree which was there. this convinces the family that kallu is actually sam. they in turn throw away johnny out of home.
johnny takes a job at the local church and starts living as the neighbor of his father's house. he keeps looking for an opportunity to kill sam, but all in vain. on the eve of christmas, sam sets the house on fire. everyone thinks johnny has done the same and blame him. johnny, disappointed with himself, writes a suicide note sitting in his hut. at that time, he sees sam and another man enter into burnt hut. he follows them and finds that sam and the man have dug into the house. they take out the stolen golden cross of the village church. johnny is seen by sam and the other man. sam tells johnny that he had stolen it long back, hidden it under the mango tree and run away. later in the meantime, as he came out of jail, the tree was cut and the house was built. so to get this, he had set the house on fire. in the meantime, the other man runs away with the cross. johnny and sam catch him in the field. the other man confesses that he was the one who had raped and murdered the lady and told the police that sam had done it. sam beats the man to death. sam injures johnny who was trying to take the cross back to the church, but falls again into the well. johnny, feeling grateful for sam's earlier help, rescues him. sam is walking with the cross when johnny reminds him of the love sam received from his family. hearing this, sam leaves the cross there only. johnny brings the cross to church, but people accuse him as thief. johnny is unable to prove his innocence. suddenly, sam appears and puts the dead body of the other man as thief. the village accepts this. as decided, if johnny gets the golden cross for church, he marries maria. johnny tells sam now he is a permanent member of the family.


== cast ==
nana patekar as kallu / sam
shreyas talpade as johny / bakri
paresh rawal as peter
om puri as david
madhuurima as maria
sona nair as maria
tarina patel as lily
asrani as father
shakti kapoor as pascal
neeraj vora as pintoo
razzak khan as paedro
rajeev pillai as gogo
anjana sukhani as item number "desi mem"


== production ==
the film is being and produced by percept picture company.


== controversy ==
catholic organisations in india have protested the film as blasphemous and offensive. the goan catholic welfare union threatened to disallow the screening in their state. shailendra singh of percept picture company has said the film is in fact clean and that he respects the sentiments of catholics.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by sajid wajid, with lyrics penned by jalees sherwani. the album consists of six songs. the audio rights of the film were acquired by t-series. the album was launched on 13 september 2012 at mumbai.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website