kamaladalam (transl.lotus petal) is a 1992 indian malayalam-language musical drama film written by a. k. lohithadas and directed by sibi malayil, starring mohanlal, murali, vineeth, nedumudi venu, thikkurissy sukumaran nair, monisha, parvathy jayaram and sukumari. the film was produced by mohanlal through his company pranavam arts. the film features original songs composed by raveendran and a background score by johnson. this movie was inspired from telugu classic sagara sangamam directed by k viswanath with kamal haasan in lead role.


== plot ==
nandagopan is a respected dance teacher at the kerala kala mandiram (alluding to the famed kerala kalamandalam repertory, which performs kerala's temple arts). however, his life takes a turn when his wife sumangala commits suicide because of a quarrel taken place between them. nandagopan said he wouldn't care if she died. immature and child like, sumangala takes his words seriously and commits suicide by burning herself. she also tried to kill herself at first because nandagopan was to be wed and she couldn't bear to see it. but she was timely saved and married by him. nandagopan tried to stop her midway, but she was dead.
in the film, sumangala's death is only revealed later to malavika (monisha). people start thinking he killed his own wife. saddened with grief, he becomes alcoholic. he comes every day to kalamandalam and creates chaos. on one such occasion when he did this the police took him away as the new secretary of the institute, velayudhan (nedmudi venu) wants him to be sacked, but his former reputation gives him a reprieve. once when he commented on malavika's dance, she feels very bad and started thinking bad on him. meanwhile, soman (vineeth) is in love with malavika.
a few days later, the institution decides malavika's arangettam is to be performed. on the day of the performance, nandagopan decides to test her focus and creates chaos, she immediately stops and the whole arangettam is gone. later, when the students strike, when he debates and apologises, they are satisfied. one day when malavika asks him to stop drinking, he tells her his story, he had specially composed sita ramayana for his wife and now she is dead. determined, malavika decides to perform it.
meanwhile, while the closeness of the guru and shishya increases, there are many rumours. soman tries to kill at first but he fails. on the day malavika's program he mixes pesticide powder in a drink and is shocked when his brother tells there is nothing wrong between guru and shishya and they have blessed him. he is filled with grief and confesses the truth to his brother. they both are literally frightened and see the drink bottle in principal, malavika and nandagopan's hands. initially, it reaches to nandagopan. and during the last scene his mouth is full of blood and everyone is horrified, but he compels the program to be completed. soon the program is completed and he falls down into the arms of soman and malavika and he dies, imagining sumangala calling him to her.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the acclaimed soundtrack of this movie was composed by music maestro raveendran master, for which the acclaimed lyrics were penned by kaithapram and alaipayuthey by oothukkadu venkatasubba iyer.


== release ==


=== reception ===
the film was a critical and commercial success. the film had a 150-day run in kerala. the performances of mohanlal, parvathy, vineeth and monisha were well received. it was one of the last films acted by monisha before her death. this film was one of the biggest hits in parvathy's career.


=== awards ===
kerala film chamber awardbest music director - raveendranbest male playback singer - k. j. yesudas


== references ==


== external links ==
kamaladalam at imdb
kamaladalam at bizhat