kanchana (also known as muni 2: kanchana) is a 2011 indian tamil-language horror comedy film written, produced and directed by raghava lawrence as a sequel to his previous venture, muni (2007) and the second film in the installment of muni film series. the film features himself alongside sarathkumar, and  lakshmi rai in the lead roles, while kovai sarala, devadarshini and sriman play supporting roles.
the film revolves around raghava, who is scared to venture outside gets possessed by a ghost and starts behaving weirdly. the film's cinematography and editing was handled by vetri and kishore te. respectively. the film's soundtrack was composed by sai thaman. the film's distribution rights were bought by sri thenandal films.
kanchana's tamil version was released on 22 july 2011 while a same-titled telugu dubbed version was released a week earlier on 15 july 2011. despite receiving mixed reviews from critics, the film became a commercial success in both languages. the film has been remade several times including  in kannada as kalpana, in sinhala  sri lanka as maya, in bengali bangladesh as mayabiny, and in hindi as laxmii; lawrence acted as screenwriter on kalpana, while directing and co-writing laxmii.


== plot ==
raghava is a typical jobless man but a lovable person who spends his days playing cricket with friends. he suffers from an irrational fear of ghosts and retreats to the safety of his home after sunset. his fear is so great he prefers to sleep with his mother and has her accompany him to the bathroom at night. this creates a major annoyance in the household, including raghava's brother, sister-in-law, and their children.
one day, raghava and his friends are forced to abandon their usual cricket ground and find a new one; they unwittingly select an abandoned ground which is rumoured to be haunted. a bizarre weather change scares them away. raghava brings home his cricket stumps, which have been stained with blood from a buried corpse in the ground. he focuses on wooing priya , his sister-in-law's sister. in the following days, his mother and sister-in-law witnesses several paranormal activities at night because of a ghost. on consulting a priest, they perform three rituals to ascertain if the house is haunted:
1. they keep a coconut on a rangoli and pray to shiva. if the coconut spins, it is considered that the house is haunted, but only 50% sure. they start to do the next ritual.
2. they make a cow eat food. if the cow runs out of the house without eating the food, the house is considered to be haunted, but they just want to make sure and start to do the next one but are 75% sure.
3. they leave a lamp lit and two drops of blood and leave the house, stopping the electricity. then the ghost of the woman appears and licks the blood. this is seen by the people, who were scared and ran away from the house for that night.
scared senseless, raghava's mother and sister-in-law hire two priests to get rid of the ghost from their house. the priests, however, are con men and run away after seeing the real ghost. that night, the ghost possesses raghava, who begins acting increasingly effeminate, alienating himself from priya and wearing women's clothes and jewellery. his family angrily confronts him, when it is revealed that there are actually three ghosts who have possessed him: a violent woman, a hindi-speaking muslim, and a mentally disabled boy. raghava's family hires an exorcist, who drives the spirit away from raghava's body. the ghost of the woman, trapped, reveals her story.
karthik alias kanchana is a transgender woman who was disowned by her parents. she is offered shelter by a kind muslim named bhai, who has an intellectually disabled son. regretting that she could not become a doctor as she intended, she adopts another young transgender girl named krishna alias geetha and works hard to support her financially. when geetha leaves to study medicine abroad, kanchana buys a plot of land where geetha intended to construct a hospital for the poor. that ground is unlawfully taken by the crooked mla shankar. kanchana angrily confronts shankar, who kills her. he also kills bhai and his son. before kanchana died, she vowed to kill shankar, his wife, and his henchmen. the bodies are then buried in kanchana's own ground.
the exorcist sympathizes with her but remains duty-bound and traps her. after hearing her story, raghava is touched; risking the danger, he allows kanchana to possess him once again. raghava/kanchana confronts shankar and disposes of his henchmen gruesomely. shankar seeks refuge in a narasimha temple which kanchana is forbidden from, but she asks the deity for justice and manages to chase him inside the temple. the three spirits combined kill shankar. a few years later, raghava has constructed the hospital for geetha as per kanchana's wishes. he also unites with priya.


== cast ==
raghava lawrence as raghava
sarathkumar as kanchana
lakshmi rai as priya
kovai sarala as raghava's mother
devadarshini as kamakshi, raghava's sister-in-law
sriman as raghava's brother
devan as mla shankar
babu antony as bhai
priya as krishna alias geetha
manobala as fake priest 1
mayilsamy as fake priest 2
minnal deepa
vijay jasper as peer baba
boys rajan as speaker


== soundtrack ==
the film's original soundtrack has been composed by s. thaman.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
the film received mixed reviews from critics. rediff wrote "it is torturous and tedious to watch, the chills and thrills are not spine-chilling and a soundtrack that is supposed to be eerie is anything but. there's quite a bit of unintended comedy too". great andhra wrote  "as for lawrence, his intention was to target the mass audience and he has been fairly successful in his attempt as compared to his prequel by infusing good depth and emotional intensity". sify wrote:"on the whole, kanchana is an entertaining affair and can be watched once".


== box office ==
according to sify, kanchana emerged 2011's most successful tamil film based on return on investment. the film, made on a budget of 7 crore (us$980,000) and marketed for 1.5 crore (us$210,000), had its telugu dubbing rights sold to bellamkonda suresh for 4 crore (us$560,000). the film grossed around 20 crore (us$2.8 million)  share from tamil nadu alone at the end of its run.


== accolades ==
vijay awardsbest supporting actor - r. sarathkumar
best female comedian - kovai sarala1st south indian international movie awardsbest actor in a supporting role - r. sarathkumar


== sequel and remakes ==
in early 2012, sources claimed that raghava lawrence was planning to make a third part of muni. furthermore, it was suggested that lawrence's brother might play the lead role in the sequel. instead, he danced with his brother in a cameo for the film. eventually the third installment kanchana 2 was released on 17 april 2015 and fourth installment kanchana 3 was released on 19 april 2019 both were commercial success at the box office.
rama narayanan, who distributed the tamil version directed the kannada remake of the film titled kalpana with upendra playing lead role and sai kumar playing the transgender role and lakshmi rai reprising her role from the original film. it was released in september 2012.in the 2016 sri lankan remake, maya, directed by donald jayantha, ranjan ramanayake played the role initially portrayed by sarath kumar as kanchana. it was unofficially remade as tar tay gyi (2017) in myanmar. in 2017, the bangladeshi remake of the film released titled mayabini starring amit hasan as kanchana.lawrence himself directed the hindi remake titled laxmii starring akshay kumar and kiara advani. it released on the online streaming service disney+hotstar on 9 november 2020.


== legacy ==
the song "sangili bungili kadhava thora" inspired a 2017 film of same name starring jiiva which was also based on the genre of horror-comedy.


== see also ==
list of indian horror films
list of ghost films


== references ==


== external links ==
kanchana at imdb
kanchana: muni 2 on sfd