kansas is a 1988 american crime drama film starring matt dillon and andrew mccarthy.
wade corey (andrew mccarthy) is on his way to a friend's wedding on the east coast when his car burns up in utah. without options he hops a freight train where he's pulled onto a moving boxcar by doyle kennedy (matt dillon).
kennedy talks the newcomer into going to kansas for a local festival. what corey doesn't know he soon finds out: kennedy is planning to use the festival as a chance to rob the local bank. before corey knows what's happening, there's a gun in his face.
in their effort to get away the pair get split-up. corey successfully hides from sight with the money while kennedy is chased across the countryside.
while the robbery is unfolding, the governor - who'd been giving a speech at the festival, sends his young daughter home with an aide after she gets a touch of heatstroke. the car gets a flat beside an old steel bridge where - high on adrenaline, corey is busy tucking away the cash.
an eager cop comes speeding down the road in pursuit of the robbers and doesn't see the governor's car, hits it, and sends it into the river with the daughter inside. forced by conscience to help, corey jumps from the bridge and carries the girl to shore. a reporter snaps a photo of the moment, but the image is blurry, and corey runs off into the woods to avoid being identified.
needing to hide out corey takes a job on a local ranch. kennedy goes through a series of scams and schemes to stay in the area, walking a tightrope; he doesn't want to be too high-profile but is bent on finding corey and the money. he eventually signs on as a ride operator with a carnival travelling thru town, where he finally spots corey.
the two agree to meet the next night and reclaim the money at the bridge. life gets in the way and corey stands him up. kennedy hunts corey down on the farm he's working at. 'you have something to fall back on, you get to play hero.' corey agrees to give kennedy the money and wash his hands of the whole thing. kennedy burns down a barn to prove a point; he wants what he thinks is his.
the fire draws the local news and the reporter who snapped the photo of the 'unknown hero.' found out, corey's back on the spot. thing is, now that he's a certifiable hero with a medal coming from the governor, how to deal with kennedy and the stolen money?
ref>leonard maltin. leonard maltin's movie and video guide. plume, 2001. p. 736.</ref>


== plot ==
a young man named wade corey (mccarthy) is going to a wedding. on the way he meets a hobo (dillon), who forces him into a bank robbery. while hiding the money they stole under a bridge, the governor's car goes off the bridge. when wade saves the governor's daughter from the car, he becomes a hero.


== cast ==
matt dillon
andrew mccarthy
leslie hope
kyra sedgwick
arlen dean snyder
alan toy
harry northup


== production ==
screenwriter spencer eastman had never been to kansas when he wrote the script. it was optioned in 1984 by george litto.filming took place on location in kansas, based out of lawrence in october 1987. wheat harvest footage was shot in north dakota. there was also filming in the town of valley falls."i kinda hung around some of the dingy bars in kansas, talked with the people there," said dillon, adding the film was " about america, the heart of america. we're doing this movie in kansas. and that's what this movie is about. people will say to me, `i heard this film is making fun of kansas.' god, i hope not. because, then, it will be making fun of me." "it's . . . different," said mccarthy. "nice place to hide out for a while. i don't want to pack up and move here, but it's okay for ten weeks."one local resident said the film "makes us all look like bumpkins straight out of `little house on the prairie.' " 
kansans will recognize when the carnival manager said the next stop was arkansas city (arkinsaw city) that the name of the town was mispronounced. arkansas city ks is pronounced  "r kansas city" also known as ark city.


== reception ==
on rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 20% based on 10 reviews, with an average rating of 3.44/10. on metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 35 out of 100, based on 8 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".roger ebert and gene siskel both gave it thumbs down, saying that the plot was recycled from horatio alger novels. hollywood video said it was uneven, although matt dillon's performance was given good reviews.
screenwriter spencer eastman was diagnosed with terminal lung cancer in october 1987, and he died six months later.


== references ==


== external links ==
kansas at imdb
kansas at rotten tomatoes
kansas at box office mojo
review of film at new york times