kanthaswamy is a 2009 indian tamil-language action thriller vigilante superhero film written and directed by susi ganesan. starring vikram as the titular character. shriya saran, ashish vidyarthi, mukesh tiwari, prabhu, krishna, and vadivelu form the pivotal cast. the film's soundtrack and background score were composed by devi sri prasad. the film's soundtrack was released on 17 may 2009 and the film was released on 21 august 2009 it is marked as first superhero film in south india.the film was partially reshot in telugu as mallanna with brahmanandam replacing vadivelu. it was remade in bangala as most welcome, starring ananta and  afiea nusrat barsha.


== plot ==
kanthaswamy (vikram) is a cbi economic offences wing officer, and along with his friends, grants the wishes of the needy who write letters to the great lord muruga temple by disguising as an anthropomorphic rooster known as kanthaswamy. during a cbi raid, he discovers a stash of black money owned by pallur paramajothi ponnusamy aka pp ponnusamy (ashish vidyarthi), a rich and corrupted entrepreneur and his assistant rajmohan (mukesh tiwari). ponnusamy pretends that he has stroke to escape questioning by the police. ponnusamy's daughter subbulakshmi (shriya saran) gets angered by the news that her father is sick. so she goes after kanthaswamy to seek revenge by pretending be in love with him. kanthaswamy, knowing her real intentions, plays along. this forms as a cat-and-mouse chase between the two. in a parallel comical role, thengakadai thenappan (vadivelu) is also sought after by a local police inspector who tries to solve the mystery of "lord muruga saving the people".
in a series of twists, the police inspector is able to bring out the truth that the cbi is involved in the role behind the secret work of helping the needy people, though he could not be able to confirm it. kanthaswamy finds subbulakshmi's family bank account password in which the black money is illegally saved. he tricks subbalakshmi into revealing the password and answers for the security questions indirectly. kanthaswamy transfers the money to his own account, which he would use for helping poor and needy people. in the end, ponnusamy gets strock upon knowing that his black money had been robbed and that the account has zero balance, where they had stored it. after that, subbulakshmi and kanthaswamy get married and live in north india. kanthaswamy sees some letters tied to a tree, just like the ones at the lord muruga temple. he reads one letter and puts it into his pocket with a secret smile, implying that he will pursue being the anthropomorphic rooster again.


== cast ==

telugu versionbrahmanandam as kobarikayala subbayya
gundu hanumantha rao as auto driver


== production ==


=== development ===
after the vigilante film samurai, actor vikram decides to do another vigilante film. in january 2007, early reports suggested that kalaipuli international were set to make a film starring vikram directed by susi ganesan, titled kanthaswamy for a release during diwali 2007. soon after the announcement shriya saran, who was acting in sivaji: the boss at the time was roped in to play the heroine. however, due to vikram and shriya's projects, the film was delayed and the first schedule was postponed to july 2007. the film's first photo shoot was carried out in june 2007 at muthukadu near chennai featuring the lead actors. the film began filming a pre-launch trailer, the first of its kind in tamil cinema, to be screened at the launch, with hari, susi ganesan and fashion designer chetan travelling to malaysia to look for hollywood-inspired costumes.the inauguration of kanthaswamy took place on 22 september 2007 at the devi paradise theatre in chennai. for the event, a unique electronic invitation, made in china, was presented to guests who had been invited. the invitation was the size of a laptop and featured an 8-minute trailer of kanthaswamy. each invitation had cost about rs. 15,000, making it the most expensive invitation in indian film history. following the launch ceremony, the team announced they had adopted two villages near madurai; sangampatti and gandhi nagar, to shoot in initially and then to provide basic amenities like school and proper roads among other things to the villagers for a year. the team, who were praised for their actions, were the first production team to take part in such activity in tamil cinema.in november 2007, the shooting was halted temporarily due to an accident that occurred at the shooting spot at the chennai boat club. cameraman ekambaram was canning the shots as per director susi ganesan's instructions when a pole erected on the sets unexpectedly fell on the director's head resulting in an injury. the film finished schedules at italy, where the trailer was filmed as well as schedules in tanzania, kenya and switzerland. during the production of the film, actor raghuvaran died suddenly and hence subsequently, his role was replaced by ashish vidyarthi which also led to delay in the release of the film. a schedule in locations in mexico was also held, after the team went location hunting there, with a song and several scenes canned. the film, initially described as a "hilarious comedy", was rumoured to be a remake of the american cult hit the breakfast club, however susi ganesan has claimed that the film has a more robin hood feel to it.


=== casting ===
following the announcement of the project, shriya saran was signed in february 2007, when she was in the middle of completing her other projects sivaji: the boss and azhagiya tamil magan. in september 2007, with the release of the trailer several other artistes names were featured as supporting cast. prominent supporting actor raghuvaran was selected to play as shriya's father and shot scenes in the role, before his unexpected death during the production of the film, subsequently, his role was replaced by ashish vidyarthi. prabhu ganesan was also added in a supporting role, as well as lesser established actors such as vikram's father vinod raj, y. g. mahendran, shiv, arun madhavan, vinayak and alex, whilst mumaith khan was assigned for an item number. later on, veteran telugu actor krishna  was signed to a role in the project as well as indrajith who will do a villainous role in the film. indrajith was selected for the role ahead of other prominent character actors arjun rampal, irfan khan and suman. along with the change of actor for raghuvaran's role, indrajith's role was taken by mukesh tiwari and the role created for santhanam was deleted. moreover, vivek, who had featured in the original trailer, opted out and was replaced by vadivelu. mansoor ali khan took up a negative role in the film to make a comeback in acting.the producer of kanthaswamy, kalaipuli s. dhanu and susi ganesan the director ensembled an experienced team to produce the film. veterans thotta tharani, a. s. laxmi narayanan and viveka between them, take care of the art direction, audiography and lyrics respectively. devi sri prasad composed the music. while n. k. ekambaram was assigned as the director of photography of the film, the film was edited by three film editors praveen k. l., n. b. srikanth and m. v. rajesh. kanal kannan and chatrapathy shakthi are the fight masters for the film, whilst mittra media are responsible for the publicity designs the film outputs, adding to their work with the trailer and the invitations. the film is co-produced, by chennai businessmen, a. paranthaman and a. k. natraj along with dhanu.


== music ==
the film has seven songs composed by devi sri prasad(dsp). for the first time, vikram has sung most of the songs in this movie. the songs from the bilingual albums were released to the public after an audio launch at the chennai trade centre in chennai on 17 may 2009. "en peru meenakumari" samples "bambara kannaala" from manamagan thevai (1957).
all tracks are written by viveka.
all lyrics are written by sahithi.


== release ==
the satellite rights of the film were sold to sun tv. the original tamil version of the film was given a "u" certificate, along with some cuts by the indian censor board. additionally, the telugu version mallanna was granted a u/a certificate, with a few cuts from the board. certain theaters reduced 15 minutes of brahmanandam's comedy from the telugu version.
due to raghuvarans death, the release was postponed.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
kanthaswamy received mixed reviews from both the critics and audiences. indiaglitz reviewed that "the movie was delight to watch and praised shriya that as a cool cat, she plays a perfect foil to vikram in the film". sify also reviewed that "the movie was a roller coaster ride of pure unadulterated masala. it praised vikram and shriya saying while vikram rocked and the film belongs to him, shriya sizzled throughout and carried the glamorous role with lan and the attitude". rediff gave the film 2.5/5 stars and commented: "watch kandhasamy for its beautiful locales, a ravishing heroine, and vikram's smile but go with nil expectations as this particular super-hero doesn't have much to offer a discerning viewer". behindwoods rated the film 2/5 and stated that it was "a hollow hype". cinema chaat gave the film 3.5/5 stars, and stated that "kanthaswamy is not a great film, but instead serves as an excellent example of what might have been."for the telugu version mallanna, fullhyd.com gave the film a positive rating of 3.25/5, writing that "well, it's been long since we saw the good guys consistently act much smarter than the bad guys. and for that alone, mallanna comes out a winner." idlebrain gave the film a rating of two-and-a-half out of five and noted that "on a whole, mallana is an example of what happens when popular screenplay goes wrong in any of shankars movies".


=== box office ===
the film collected  13.7 million in the uk. in malaysia it collected a $1,077,658 in its total run. in chennai box office it collected  72.8 million in seven weeks.


=== accolaedes ===
amrita mathrubhumi award

best actress  shriyaedison awards

best public relations officer  diamond babuvijay awards
the film has been nominated for the following categories:
favorite hero  vikram
favorite heroine  shriya saran
favorite film  kalaipuli s. dhanu
favorite director  susi ganesan
best music director  devi sri prasad
best art director  thotta tharani
best female playback singer  rita
best choreographer  saravana rajan
best make up artistes  nellai shanmugam
best costume designer  chaitanya and sai


== references ==


== external links ==
kanthaswamy at imdb