karan arjun is a 1995 indian hindi-language action thriller film directed and produced by rakesh roshan, starring salman khan, shah rukh khan, mamta kulkarni, kajol and rakhee gulzar in lead roles, with amrish puri portraying the main antagonist and johnny lever, arjun, jack gaud, ranjeet and aasif sheikh in supporting roles. it tells the story of the titular two brothers who seek revenge from their greedy uncle for murdering their father, but are killed by him and are reincarnated to complete the revenge.
karan arjun was theatrically released in india on 13 january 1995. the film received positive reviews from critics and grossed 640 million ($20 million), emerging as a "blockbuster" and the second highest-grossing bollywood film of 1995, behind dilwale dulhania le jayenge, which also featured shah rukh khan, kajol and amrish puri.


== plot ==
in a village in rajasthan, durga singh (rakhee gulzar) is a poor woman raising her two beloved sons karan (salman khan) and arjun (shah rukh khan). when munshiji (ashok saraf) of thakur sangram singh, comes to talk to durga, durga reveals that their father was the thakur's son, who had married her against his father's wishes. durjan singh (amrish puri), a relative of thakur, killed durga's husband to prevent him or his family from inheriting the thakur's estate.
durjan kills thakur and when he learns of his plans to sign over the estate to karan and arjun, he brutally murders both with the help of his brothers-in-law, nahar (arjun) and shamsher (jack gaud). durga prays to goddess kali to bring her sons back. miraculously, her prayers are heard and her sons are still alive, but are separated and grown into different families with no knowledge of their past lives  durga is unaware of this miracle.
20 years pass. arjun is grown up as vijay. he falls in love with the wealthy sonia (kajol), but doesn't know that sonia will be married with durjan singh's son, suraj (aashif sheikh). meanwhile, karan is grown up as ajay. he is chased upon by tomboy bindiya (mamta kulkarni) who loves him. he soon works for saxena (ranjeet), sonia's father and durjan's partner in his illegal arms trading business. knowing that sonia loves vijay, suraj attempts to kill him but ends up burning the farm of vijay's uncle. at sonia and suraj's engagement party, vijay arrives and attacks suraj. ajay is sent to kill vijay and the two start to fight, which is suddenly interrupted after a bolt of lightning strikes in between them. saxena tries to shoot vijay, but ajay stops him whilst shouting for arjun to run. this is something that ajay had said to vijay in their previous life when he was being attacked. ajay is sent to prison while vijay escapes. sonia is forcibly taken to durjan's house to marry suraj.
vijay and his friend linghaiyya (johnny lever) travel to save sonia. everybody in the village who sees him is stunned and calls him arjun. he finally remembers his past life and reunites with durga, where he gets to know about his brother karan, who is now ajay. vijay saves ajay and explains the whole situation that they were brothers named karan and arjun. meanwhile, bindiya joins them. durjan hears about karan and arjun's return but refuses to believe it, so his brothers-in-law attempted to bring them before him but instead they were killed by karan and arjun in a similar way as they killed the two brothers.
at the village temple of goddess kali, rituals are held for sonia and suraj's wedding. karan/ajay and arjun/vijay frighten durjan by convincing him that they are back. soon, saxena and durjan have a falling out, in which saxena tells sonia to run away with arjun, but it's revealed to be a trap. karan succeeds in creating chaos, letting arjun and sonia escape from the trap. vijay managed to kill suraj in a closed-range shot, upon which durjan kills saxena in a fit of rage.
after all his henchmen were killed, durjan attempted to kill karan and arjun but instead they overpowered him. he runs to durga and begs her for forgiveness. however, she declines it and orders her sons to fulfill their revenge by killing him. later, arjun marries sonia and karan marries bindiya with the whole family reunited.


== cast ==
salman khan as karan singh/ajay
shah rukh khan as arjun singh/vijay
rakhee gulzar as durga singh, karan and arjun's mother
mamta kulkarni as mink singh, ajay's love-interest
kajol as sonia saxena singh, vijay's love-interest
amrish puri as thakur durjan singh
ranjeet as soojam saxena, sonia's father
johnny lever as linghaiyya
aasif sheikh as suraj singh, durjan's son
ashok saraf as bhaktish munshi
jack gaud as shamsher singh
arjun as nahar singh
gavin packard as the fighter with red pants
ila arun as rajasthani dancer (segment gup chup)
kishore bhanushali as ranjesh
suresh chatwal as girdhari singh
salim khan ding-dong as fight organiser
john gabriel as peter
dinesh hingoo as peston
raj kishore as jugal
anil nagrath as fight organiser
ghanshyam rohera as ashuveer bakshi
babbanlal yadav as manjesh


== production ==


=== casting ===
rakesh roshan originally wanted to make the film with shah rukh khan and ajay devgn as the titular characters. however, both wanted to play different roles to the ones offered to them; khan wanted to play karan, while devgn wanted to play arjun. roshan did not agree, and, as a result, both backed out of the film. roshan's next choices for the leads were aamir khan and salman khan. while salman agreed to do the film, aamir could not do it. shah rukh then told roshan that he wanted to do the film. thus, the casting of the film brought together salman khan and shah rukh khan for the first time onscreen, two prominent actors of that time.
hrithik roshan assisted his father during this film, having assisted him in his previous movies .


=== filming ===
the whole film was shot in rajasthan. more specifically, the village which is portrayed in the film is one of the villages of alwar district of rajasthan, named bhangarh. the durga temple where karan arjun pray in the song is located at pushkar near ajmer. sariska palace was used as thakur durjan singh's house.


== box office ==
karan arjun was the second-highest-grossing indian film of 1995, before dilwale dulhania le jayenge, which also starred shah rukh khan, kajol and amrish puri. domestically in india, karan arjun grossed 640 million ($20 million). overseas, the film grossed $500,000 (15.8 million).


== awards ==
filmfare awardsbest action  bhiku varma
best editing  sanjay varma
nominatedbest movie - rakesh roshan
nominatedbest director  rakesh roshan
nominatedbest actor  salman khan
nominatedbest music director  rajesh roshan
nominatedbest performance in a comic role  johnny lever
nominatedfilmfare award for best performance in a comic role  ashok saraf
nominatedbest supporting actress  rakhee
nominatedbest performance in a negative role  amrish puriscreen awardsbest music director  rajesh roshan
nominatedbest actor  salman khan


== music ==
the music and background score were composed by rajesh roshan and lyrics for all the songs were penned by indeevar. the music rights were originally bought by time magnetics (now tips music). song "bhangra paale" remake 2020's movie bhangra paa le

additionally, the themes from the terminator 2 and the last of the mohicans were featured throughout the film, especially during fight & jail scenes.


== references ==


== external links ==
karan arjun at imdb