karzzzz (transl.debt) is a 2008 indian hindi-language action film directed by satish kaushik. it stars urmila matondkar and himesh reshammiya.  it is a remake of karz (1980) and also inspired by the reincarnation of peter proud which itself inspired by indian film madhumati.


== plot ==
ravi verma (dino morea) has just won a court case against gangster sir juda (gulshan grover) in kenya and has legally received entitlement to several thousand acres of vineyards. he celebrates the victory by marrying the love of his life kamini (urmila matondkar) and decides to bring her to meet his mother and his sister. unbeknownst to ravi, kamini is in hand with juda. en route, kamini sabotages the plane and jumps out, and there is no parachute for ravi. subsequently, ravi crashes to his death and kamini becomes princess kamini. she throws out ravi's mother and sister making them utterly destitute.
25 years later, monty (himesh reshammiya) in south africa is a sensational rock star  the adopted son of j.j. oberoi and his wife  and has everything but happiness. his only spark of happiness is his friend dayal (bakhtiyaar irani) and a girl tina (shweta kumar). monty gets flashbacks of the events that happened in ravi's life and  decides to trip to kenya to determine why, where incidentally he meets tina's caretaker kabira (danny denzongpa). kabira is happy for tina and monty to be together.
monty realizes that he is actually a reincarnation of ravi varma. he has the complete recollection of his accident but wants to find out where his mother and sister are. he befriends princess kamini, who incidentally knows tina as well, and is now mistress to juda and strung in ravi varma's property. monty tells her about his reincarnation, but lies to her saying that he can't remember how he died. kamini lies to monty that his mother and sister are deceased and about the actual circumstances of the accident that killed him in his previous birth. monty eventually finds his sister and mother, now living with his nephew and niece. he decides to bring kamini to book, with the help of tina and kabira.
monty convinces kamini to marry him. he shows her the actual papers of all properties of ravi varma by memory, and kamini falls for it. they get married on register on stage at a show of monty's, wherein monty by song and act reveals to kamini that he knows all about her treachery.
kamini is desperate now. she is confronted by monty in a showdown, where kamini reveals in anger that it was she who killed ravi varma. monty brings in his mother and sister with her kids and says that they will get back everything of theirs from kamini. on scene appears kabira with the police who have recorded kamini's words. but juda comes too, holding tina hostage in return for kamini. a fight ensues, with tina being rescued by kabira and juda tackled. kamini runs away, with monty hot on her heels. they incidentally arrive at the same spot where ravi was killed. kamini boards a plane and tries to gun monty. monty's car overturns with fuel leakage. as kamini's plane approaches him, monty sets the car on fire, engulfing the plane as well, thus crashing it.
monty and tina are united as the end credits roll.


== cast ==
urmila matondkar as kamini devi verma
himesh reshammiya as monty oberoi; reincarnation of ravi verma
danny denzongpa as kabira (kabir uncle "kabir chacha")
rohini hattangadi as mrs. shanta prasad verma, ravi's mother
smita bansal as  jyoti verma 'aka' pinky, ravi's sister
gulshan grover as sir judah, a left hand robot
bakhtiyaar irani as dr. dayal
raj babbar as officer j. j. oberoi
himani shivpuri as neha oberoi, j.j. oberoi's wife
dino morea as ravi verma (kamini devi's husband)
tareena patel as julie, special appearance
david hallart as dancer, background actor
asrani as college principal joe d'souza
sudhir dalvi as dr. shastri, dr. dayal's boss
imran hasnee as mahesh; tina's dad
shiva rindani as sir judah's man
sudhir pandey as john


== production ==
the film was flagged on 25 january 2008. filming took place in mumbai, india and in south africa. on 16 february 2008, himesh reshammiya had given a live performance in south africa of the two ultimate dance numbers namely "sisak sisak ke" and "hari om". the sound recording was entirely done in singapore. reshammiya performed his songs "lut jaaon" and "ek haseena thi" at sa re ga ma pa challenge 2009's first show.


== reception ==
taran adarsh of bollywood hungama gave karzzzz 4 stars out of 5 claiming it to be a "mass entertainer" and further saying that "karzzzz is rich in entertainment. himesh's tremendous popularity amongst masses, its chartbusting musical score and the fact that it's a remake of a much-loved film will only lure masses in hordes. besides, it's an open ground for karzzzz at the ticket window, what with the euphoria of all past releases having dried up. at the box-office, the film should fetch a thunderous start and in due course, should be amongst the biggest achievers of the year in terms of business, critics praised urimilla performance in the  film ." rajeev masand of cnn-ibn gave the film one star and said "it's a lazy rip-off where everything from characters to dialogues has been more-or-less duplicated, the only changes being superficial ones which grate rather than update."


== soundtrack ==
himesh reshammiya composed the film's music while sameer penned the lyrics. the song "ek haseena thi" is taken from the original movie of 1980, karz, whose music was by laxmikant pyarelal. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 13,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's eleventh highest-selling.

all lyrics are written by sameer.


=== awards and nominations ===
urmila matondkar was nominated for her role of princess kamini in stardust awards 2009.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
karzzzz at imdb