kasaba is a 2016 indian malayalam-language action thriller film written and directed by nithin renji panicker, starring mammootty, along with neha saxena as his pair, while varalaxmi, sampath raj, and jagadish played the important supporting roles. the first day gross was the highest for a malayalam film.  the film ended up grossing 14.37 crore (us$2.0 million)


== plot ==
rajan zachariah is a police inspector posted at palakkad district police station. zachariah is a person who doesn't give a tinker's damn about what people think . zachariah is very close to ig chandrasekhar and his son arjun. arjun and his fiance die mysteriously in kaliyoor  a place located on the kerala-karnataka border. as per the police reports the deaths were due to maoist attacks but ig chandrasekhar and zachariah refuse to believe it. zachariah being the godfather of arjun asks chandrasekhar to post him at kaliyoor to find out the truth. zachariah arrives at kaliyoor and tries to solve the mystery behind deaths of arjun and his fiance and how it is connected to the death of six policemen and circle inspector raghavan.
zachariah understands that parameshwaran nambiar is the main figure in the village. zachariah finds out that kamala- who is in charge of the brothel along with nambiar had killed ci raghavan. arjun and his fiance witness the murder and flees away. while escaping from nambiar's goons arjun and his fiance get into a police van asking help by introducing himself as i.g.'s son. nambiar instructs his goons to attack the police van thereby killing arjun, his fiance and the six policemen.
nambiar who is contesting district level elections for the first time, finds thankachan, caretaker of kamala's brothel as a possible liability and kills him through his goons under the guise of a maoist attack. kamala is thankachan's daughter which is revealed by a letter written by thankachan to kamala before his death. vengeful kamala kills nambiar to avenge the death of her father with the help of zachariah. kamala later calls zachariah to thank him for helping her and she intends to finish him off to wipe the slate clean. zachariah tactfully arrests her for killing ci raghavan and nambiar by acting friendly. zachariah later rescues the sex workers from the brothel.


== cast ==
mammootty as c.i rajan zachariah
varalaxmi as kamala (voice-over by sreeja)
neha saxena as susan
jagadish as sub-inspector (s. i.) mukundan
sampath raj as parameshwaran nambiar
chinnu kuruvilla
maqbool salmaan as jagan
sandeep narayanan as a goon
shaheen siddique as arjun
siddique as inspector-general (i.g.) chandrashekhar ips, arjun's father
rakendu as professor jacob
alencier ley lopez as thankachan, kamala's father
biju pappan as c.i. raghavan
jennifer antony as pavizham, s. i. mukundan's wife
abu salim as pazhani
sasi kalinga as linguswamy


== production ==
in january 2016, it was reported that mammootty would star in nithin renji panicker's directorial debut, the son of malayalam screenwriter renji panicker. raai laxmi was earlier reported to be as the heroine, but later varalaxmi sarathkumar was confirmed to be part of the film.
the filming commenced in february 2016, and the unit filmed in locations of kozhikode, kolar gold fields and pazhani. the filming ended in april.


== release ==
the film was scheduled for an eid release, on 7 july. the film's teaser has become one of the most viewed malayalam film teaser, by completing 5.1 lakhs (510,000) "real-time" views in 24 hours.
at the time, the kasaba teaser was the fastest malayalam teaser to cross the 1 million mark, doing so in four days.


== claims of misogyny ==
on 19 july 2016, kerala women's commission sent court notices to actor mammootty, director nitin panicker, and producer alice george for allegedly portraying women in poor light in the film. commission chairperson, k c rosakutty teacher, said that the film used dialogues which were "insulting to womanhood in general". she added, "in the name of freedom of expression, women cannot be insulted whether it is for character or else". when an actor like mammootty involves in such projects, it may lead to a "dangerous acceptance" of such actions and remarks in the society. the commission also sent a report to amma and malayalam cine technicians association with a request to revise the film's certification.in one of the most controversial scenes in the film, the rogue police officer character portrayed by mammootty, walks over to a female police officer, pulls at her belt and tells her that he can make her miss her menstrual cycle. this scene came under severe criticism right from the film's release. in december 2017, specifically referring to this scene, actress parvathy criticised the film as having misogynistic dialogue. she faced threats by a section of mammootty fans, after which she filed a police complaint on 26 december. several people came in support of parvathy and the controversy sparked a discussion on misogyny in the entire film industry of kerala, with several actresses mainly under the aegis of women in cinema collective, came to the front questioning the male dominance in malayalam cinema.


== box office ==
the movie collected 2.43 crore (us$340,000) in kerala on its first day. the film collected 7.35 crore (us$1.0 million) from first four days, and 8.18 crore (us$1.1 million) from first five days of release at the kerala box office. the film collected 10.44 crore (us$1.5 million) in nine days of its theatrical run in kerala, and 14.37 crore (us$2.0 million) in its final run.


== references ==


== external links ==
kasaba at imdb