keep the lights on is a 2012 american drama film written by ira sachs and mauricio zacharias and directed by sachs. it premiered at the 2012 sundance film festival, and was released on september 7, 2012 by music box films. the film stars thure lindhardt as erik, a danish filmmaker living in new york city to work on a documentary film about artist avery willard; while there, he enters into a loving but complicated long-term relationship with paul (zachary booth), a lawyer in the publishing industry who struggles with drug addiction. the film's cast also includes julianne nicholson, soulymane sy savan, paprika steen, david anzuelo, maria dizzia, and miguel del toro.
the film is based on sachs' own past relationship with bill clegg, a literary agent who published his own memoir about his struggles with addiction, portrait of an addict as a young man, in 2010.


== plot ==
in 1998, erik, a danish artist living in new york city, meets paul, a lawyer, through a phone sex hotline. clearly attracted to each other, they share an intimate moment and have sex. erik later visits a man named russ who seems more interested in showing off his muscles to erik than having sex. erik sees paul again, and tells him about how he broke up with his ex-boyfriend paolo, who was hiv-positive. erik confides to his friend claire on how he is happier now with paul than he was with paolo. meanwhile, paul asks erik to keep quiet about his drug use and gets erik high. paul, who was closeted before meeting erik, sees his ex-girlfriend while visiting an art gallery with erik, who tries to persuade paul to introduce him to her. while away from the city, erik calls his doctor for some test results and learns that he is hiv-negative. later, paul throws a surprise birthday party for erik.
in 2000, paul catches erik talking to another man in the street. while confronting erik about this, paul argues with him, but they manage to get over it. paul then briefly goes missing during a dinner with erik and his friends, and evades erik's questions about where he was. erik, away from home working on his documentary, feels lonely and calls a phone sex hotline. however, he is startled when he is connected with paul. erik is left upset. back in new york, erik argues again with paul but they manage to make up in the night. later, erik returns home from working on his documentary, he finds an unconscious paul outside their apartment. paul is sent to rehab and states that erik ruined his life. erik goes to a gay club and meets a painter named igor.
in 2003, with paul's release from rehab and erik's success with his film, erik assumes everything will be better. erik's life is rocked when he learns that paul hasn't been home while he was away for work. however, while his sister comforts him, erik gets a call from paul who tells him to visit him in his hotel. paul displays erratic behavior, trying to pretend he is okay while it is clear to erik that he hasn't improved since rehab. erik tries to convince paul to return home, but paul remains at the hotel and hires a male prostitute whom he has sex with while erik watches on. erik later visits russ, and the two share some drugs and presumably have sex.
in 2006, after not having seen each other for about a year, paul meets erik at a diner, where both seem better than before. he then invites paul to spend the night at his apartment, to which paul agrees, only to avoid having sex before going to sleep. erik later runs into igor on the street, and the two have a drink at a bar. while spending time together in the countryside, erik asks paul how he feels about their relationship, only for paul to turn aggressive. paul gives erik an ultimatum, stating that he has a few hours to decide whether they move in together, or break up. erik decides that they should move in together, only to drive to paul's apartment in the city in the middle of the night to tell him that he's changed his mind. he walks paul to work and erik admits that he still loves him, although paul is skeptical. the two hug, and paul tells erik to be well.


== cast ==
thure lindhardt as erik rothman
zachary booth as paul lucy
julianne nicholson as claire
souleymane sy savane as alassane
paprika steen as karen
miguel del toro as igor
sebastian la cause as russ
david anzuelo as russ' boyfriend
maria dizzia as vivian
justin reinsilber as dan
ed vassallo as tom


== reception and awards ==
keep the lights on received acclaim from most movie critics. the review aggregator website rotten tomatoes reported a 90% approval rating with an average rating of 7.6/10 based on 61 reviews. metacritic.com gave the film a score of 79 out of 100 based on 26 critics.the film won the 2012 teddy award for best feature. thure lindhardt was nominated for the gotham independent film award for breakthrough actor. the film was also nominated for four independent spirit awards: best feature, best director, best actor, and best original screenplay.


== references ==


== external links ==
keepthelightsonfilm.com (official website)
keep the lights on at imdb
keep the lights on at rotten tomatoes
keep the lights on at metacritic