kendasampige (part:2 ginimari case) is a 2015 indian kannada thriller film directed by duniya soori and written by surendranath. it stars newcomers santhosh reva (vikky varun) and manvitha harish in the lead roles, making their debuts with the film. rajesh nataranga, prakash belawadi and chandrika feature in supporting roles. the film is a sequel to forthcoming film kaage bangara. the plot which is centered on a couple who are framed in a case of crime and are on a run from police, exposes the nexus between the latter and the influential. the road drama was praised for bringing forth a dirty web of drug trade, the mafia, corrupt police officials and a questionable judicial system.  the movie is based on a 1996 story by writer surendranath.produced under the banner parimala film factory, the cinematography for the film was done by satya hegde and was edited by deepu s. kumar. v. harikrishna composed the film score and the soundtrack. 
on 18 december 2015 kendasampige completed 100 days run in 5 theaters. director soori had initially announced that the film will have a prequel titled kaage bangara and a sequel titled black magic. but, kaage bangara was stalled owing to demonetization since the director felt that the storyline he prepared was no more relevant after issue of new currency notes. however, he revived  kaage bangara after the 2020 movie popcorn monkey tiger which served as a link between kendasampige and kaage bangara.


== plot ==
the film tells a story of drugs, mafia and corruption in the police system in mangaluru, before the viewer is brought to bengaluru to narrate the love saga which is a typical poor boy-meets-rich girl scenario. but, this young couple has more than just the girl's status-conscious mum to worry about.
the story revolves around ravindra (vikky varun) who works in the office of gowri shettys (manvitha harish) mother shakuntala shettys (chandrikas) as an attendant. a circumstance arises and gowri gets attracted to ravindra who reciprocates. the twist comes when ravindra is booked in a drug related case. he escapes from  jail and while on the run, informs gowri. she not only helps ravindra with money but also accompanies him through the journey from city to city for seven days. the truth unfolds as they are chased by the police. they move to many cities day by day.
ravi works as a supplier in a bar in mumbai. on one day he calls up gowri and tells her that he is alive. she feels happy for him.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
v. harikrishna composed the film score and the soundtrack for the film, lyrics for which was penned by jayant kaikini and yogaraj bhat. the soundtrack album consists of four tracks. the album was launched on 26 july 2015 in bangalore in the presence of soori's forthcoming film doddmane hudga team, including actors puneeth rajkumar and radhika pandit. actors v. ravichandran and duniya vijay were other invitees.


=== track listing ===


== references ==


== external links ==
kendasampige website :  |   
kendasampige at imdb
soori silently finishes first schedule of kendasampige