keshava is a 2017 indian telugu-language action thriller film written and directed by sudheer varma. produced by abhishek nama, it features nikhil siddharth and ritu varma in the lead roles, with dialogues by krishna chaitanya, arjun-carthyk, music composed by sunny m.r., cinematography by divakar mani, and editing by s. r. shekar. the movie was released on 19 may 2017.


== plot ==
a family of 4 travelling in a car were hit by a police jeep and left to die. keshava wakes up in the hospital to learn that his parents were killed and his younger sister lost her legs. the story shifts to present with keshava (nikhil siddharth), now a youngster, walking in a desolate forest road and asks a biker for lift. after a while, the biker halts to attend the nature call and keshava stabs him to death. keshava narrates in a voice-over that he is a law student with a rare heart condition  dextrocardia, which prevents him from activities resulting in faster heart beat. so, he has to do everything leisurely even if it's a murder. a fisherman witness the dead body of the biker hanging from a tree and informs the police. the police identify the victim as a police officer. satyabhama (ritu varma) joins the college and attends the same class as keshava. satyabhama recognizes keshava as her childhood friend, but he dismisses it and keeps avoiding her. as the police fail to find any clues, police commissioner appoints a special officer, sharmila mishra (isha koppikar), to investigate the case. keshava is sipping tea in front of a police station and identifies another police officer as someone who tried to kill him and his sister in hospital but he managed to escape. he follows the police officer on his bike and kills him in a desolate place.
sharmila finds the dead body hanging from a construction crane. she connects the dots and figures out that these two murders were done by same person and interprets that the killer is trying to convey something. after investigation, she concludes that the killer is left-handed. satyabhama notices keshava writing with his left hand and remembers him doing the same in their childhood. she follows him to library and notices him reading about the murders. she manages to get the attendance register and finds out that keshava was absent during both days of murders. she goes to his home and makes him admit that he is her childhood friend. keshava, satyabhama and his friends go to annavaram to volunteer in a temple program. keshava comes across another police officer (raja ravindra) and recognizes him to be the one who had left his family to die after the accident. he kills the officer after a fight but he is noticed by watchmen while returning and one of them hits him with a stone on the back of his head. after returning to the accommodation, his friends confront him to confess his activities. he narrates his past which lead him to kill some people. they decide to help him. he gets treatment for his head injury from a local doctor who informs police after watching the news about the murder and details of suspect in tv. the next day while travelling in a bus, sharmila catches him and takes him to visakhapatnam for interrogation.
keshava denies all charges on him and his friends destroy any evidence of his involvement. meanwhile, a retired police officer krishna murthy (rao ramesh) is reportedly attacked by a person matching the description of the murderer. keshava is eventually released and meets the officer. he narrates that he is among the people responsible for the death of his parents. while returning from election duty, nakul (ajay) and others were fully drunk and nakul was driving the jeep and caused accident. although he requested them to save the victims, nakul ignored. keshava later admits to sharmila that he is the murderer and narrates that he is not avenging the accident but murder. he says that his parents were alive after the accident and the police returned and drove over them to make sure that there won't be complaint against them. keshava finds another officer bheemeshwar (brahmaji), and kills him in broad daylight. nakul tries to locate keshava but fails. sharmila gets suspicious about krishna murthy and he kidnaps her. keshava is kidnapped by nakul's henchmen but he manages to escape from them and kills nakul with the help of one of his henchmen. krishna murthy and sharmila have a heated argument and he admits that he drove the jeep at the time of accident and is the prime culprit. he only rescued keshava from police so that keshava kills nakul and he inherits binami properties of nakul. keshava is already on the spot when krishna murthy was narrating real events to sharmila. in a subsequent chase, krishna murthy meets with an accident. keshava warns him not to drink and drive at least in his next life and burns the car. sharmila closes the case as an accident. keshava starts a new life with his sister and satyabhama.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music composed by sunny m.r.. music released on e3 music company.


== critical reception ==
times of india rated the film 3/5.it was made on an bugdet of 7 cr and box office was 18 cr in worldwide gross.
idlebrain rated it 3/5 and wrote, "keshava is a stylish revenge drama that appeals to a set of audiences."


== references ==


== external links ==
keshava at imdb
keshava on facebook