khaidi no. 150 (transl.prisoner no. 150) is a 2017 indian telugu-language action drama film directed by v. v. vinayak and produced by ram charan. the film stars chiranjeevi in a double role alongside kajal aggarwal with tarun arora, brahmanandam, ali and posani krishna murali playing pivotal roles. the film which marks chiranjeevi's return to films in a full length role after a decade, is also his 150th film. the third entry of his successful khaidi trilogy, the film is an official remake of the 2014 tamil film kaththi, written and directed by a. r. murugadoss.
principal photography of the film commenced in june 2016 in hyderabad. the film was a success at the box office and emerged as second highest-grossing telugu film of 2017.


== plot ==
in kolkata, prisoner kaththi seenu (chiranjeevi), a petty criminal, helps the police capture an escaping prisoner, but he himself escapes afterwards. he goes to hyderabad and decides to escape to bangkok. however, he drops this plan after meeting and falling in love with subbalakshmi (kajal aggarwal), his childhood friend at the airport, who dupes him into believing that she gave him her phone number realizing that he has a crush on her. later, seenu and his assistant malli (ali) notice a doppelgnger of seenu named shankar (chiranjeevi), being shot by a group of thugs. they admit him to hospital, following which seenu decides to impersonate the injured shankar to escape from the police. under the name of his doppelgnger, seenu and malli enter an old-age home run by shankar with the aim of collecting 25 lakhs (which is meant for the inmates of the old-age home) for their bangkok trip, until he learns about his doppelgnger's mission.
shankar is a post-graduate in hydrology from the arid village of neeruru in rayalaseema, who had discovered groundwater under some lands of the village which could be used as an irrigation source not only for the village, but for the entire rayalaseema and the neighbouring areas as well. but, an mnc owned by aggarwal (tarun arora) cheated the villagers into giving their lands for the construction of a factory. shankar was arrested by the police, and the six villagers commit suicide so as to convince the issue with the media and release of shankar. on learning of the plight of shankar and the villagers, seenu decides to fight for their cause while still under the name of shankar. the people of the old home and seenu go to the jury and try to convince him to go in favour of them, but seenu starts stating rules and scares the main jury person (whom aggarwal had bribed). seenu then sends a person (disguised as a hairdresser) to aggarwal and makes him lay a fingerprint on aggarwal's neck. after that aggarwal sends 50 men to kill seenu, but he soon defeats them using the coins the lion club member gave when he was attending a ceremony for him.
meanwhile, the real shankar gains consciousness and finds himself in the kolkata prison where seenu was locked up. with the help of the man who seenu helped capture, who has heard his story and has plans to kill seenu in revenge for getting him caught and thrown back into prison, he soon escapes along with the prisoner's henchmen.
not knowing that shankar and the henchmen are headed for hyderabad, seenu makes efforts to convince the media to bring the plight of the villagers to the national consciousness, but the media is not interested as they feel that it is not sensational news. a few days later, at the high court, the judge declares the verdict in favour of seenu and the villagers, but adds that aggarwal has claimed that certain villagers who are working abroad have shown their support for the factory. if they cannot prove that their support was faked by aggarwal within the next five days, the verdict will then go in favour of aggarwal and the villagers will lose their lands. since the villagers, who have denied supporting the factory, are abroad and cannot come to hyderabad within five days to rebut aggarwal's claims, and the verdict is to be decided within five days, seenu decides to take drastic measures to sensationalize the issue. he, lakshmi, malli, and the inmates of the old-age home block water supply to hyderabad by sitting on the pipelines which carry water to hyderabad. with the plight of the hyderabad people due to lack of water supply having gained national attention, seenu comes out of the pipeline after a few days and highlights the villagers' plight in an emotionally charged speech to the media, which is telecast nationwide and moves many people.
meanwhile, shankar and the henchmen reach hyderabad, but shankar is soon kidnapped by aggarwal's henchmen. while in aggarwal's custody, he sees seenu's speech on television and is moved by the efforts made by his doppelgnger to help the villagers. on the night before the verdict, seenu's bluff is exposed, but he assures the old men that he is genuinely interested in their cause, that shankar is alive and that he will rescue shankar from aggarwal and hand him back over to the villagers with the assurance of a positive verdict. seenu goes to aggarwal's office, where shankar is being held. he rescues shankar and fights aggarwal. seenu kills aggarwal when he was about to kill shankar.
the next day, the verdict is declared in favour of shankar and the villagers. the kolkata police find seenu and arrest him. seenu assures lakshmi that he will be back shortly.


== cast ==


== production ==


=== development ===
chiranjeevi's  150th full-length feature film began filming in april 2016. the film is the remake of 2014 tamil film, kaththi, featuring vijay and samantha ruth prabhu which dealt with issues such as farmer suicides and water scarcity in india. the film was financed by chiranjeevi's son ram charan and producer a. subashkaran and v. v. vinayak directed chiranjeevi for the second time. the paruchuri brothers wrote the script based on a.r. murugadoss' original story. devi sri prasad composed music for the film.


=== casting ===
the film features chiranjeevi and kajal aggarwal was finalised as the heroine in late july 2016. tarun arora was selected as the antagonist for the film.


=== filming ===
principal photography commenced on 23 june 2016 as key sequences being shot at chanchalguda central jail in hyderabad. later, in august 2016 chiranjeevi and kajal joined the shooting at rajiv gandhi international airport, hyderabad. a special song was shot with raai laxmi and chiranjeevi in october 2016. in november, two songs were shot with the lead pair chiranjeevi and kajal in europe. raghava lawrence, jani master and sekhar choreographed the dances. kannal kannan and the duo ram lakshman choreographed the fights. the visual effects for the film were made by red chillies vfx, a subsidiary of red chillies entertainment.


== soundtrack ==

the soundtrack album and background score were composed by devi sri prasad. the soundtrack album consists of five tracks.

all music is composed by devi sri prasad.


== box office ==
khaidi no. 150 grossed 50.45 crore on the opening day. kn150 crossed the 95.4 crore mark in 2 days. it grossed over $2.45 million in the usa. as of february 2017 the film has grossed 164 crore.


== awards and nominations ==


== references ==


== external links ==
khaidi no. 150 at imdb