khamoshi: the musical is an indian 1996 hindi-language musical romantic drama film directed by sanjay leela bhansali in his directorial debut. the film stars manisha koirala, nana patekar and salman khan. it was not successful at the box office but is cited as one of the best musicals of hindi cinema. manisha koirala's portrayal of annie, a caring daughter of a deaf-mute couple, was critically praised, and is regarded as one of her finest performances till date. she won several awards for her performance including the screen award for best actress and her second consecutive filmfare critics award for best actress. music of the film was composed by the duo jatinlalit, with lyrics by majrooh sultanpuri.


== plot ==
the story is about joseph (nana patekar) and flavy braganza (seema biswas), a deaf and mute couple in goa. they have a baby girl, annie (played by priya parulekar as young annie), who is able to speak and hear. a few years later they have another baby, a boy named sam, who also speaks and hears. annie's life is divided into two worlds  one with her parents and the other of music, which she loves. annie gets her musical inspirations from her grandmother, maria braganza (helen).
a few years later, after the tragic death of sam, annie's (manisha koirala) life is shattered and music and singing fade away. when annie grows up she gets in touch with music once again  with raj (salman khan) whom she falls in love with. she starts singing again. when annie gets pregnant, her father tells her to abort the baby because it will dishonor the family. annie refuses to go against her church and religion. when joseph learns this, he asks annie to leave the house. raj tries to convince annie's father that he is a nice guy, but joseph dislikes him mainly because he is a hindu who doesn't live in goa, so annie would have to live far away from him.
annie marries raj and gives birth to a boy, whom they name sam, after her brother. she, raj, and sam go to joseph's house to reconcile with him. joseph accepts annie's boy and approves raj as his son-in-law. things are really beautiful until their life takes a drastic turn. annie and raj have a devastating accident; annie is seriously injured and goes into a coma. joseph, flavy, and raj try hard to revive her, even trying to stir her emotionally for the sake of sam. the broken raj, joseph's moving mute "speech", and flavy's love and hope bring annie back to consciousness.


== cast ==
manisha koirala as annie braganza
salman khan as rajant "raj" kashyap
nana patekar as joseph braganza (annie's father)
seema biswas as flavy j. braganza (annie's mother)
helen as maria braganza (joseph's mother and annie's grandmother)
himani shivpuri as neelima kashyap (raj's mother)
raghuvir yadav as willie


== music ==
the musical numbers were composed by jatin lalit. the lyrics were written by majrooh sultanpuri. the soundtrack topped the music charts in india.


== awards ==


=== 1996 filmfare awards ===
critics award for best movie - sanjay leela bhansali
filmfare critics award for best actress - manisha koirala
nominated, filmfare award for best actress- manisha koirala
nominated, filmfare award for best music director -  jatin-lalit
best female playback - kavita krishnamurthy for "aaj main upar"
best art direction - nitin chandrakant desai
best sound design - jitendra chowdhary


=== 1996 star screen awards ===
best actress - manisha koirala
best supporting actress - seema biswas
star screen award for best female playback - kavita krishnamurthy for "aaj main upar"
star screen award for best lyricist - majrooh sultanpuri for "aaj main upar"


== references ==


== external links ==
khamoshi: the musical at imdb
khamoshi: the musical at indiafm.com
khamoshi soundtrack on amazon.com
khamoshi soundtrack