khoka 420 is a bengali romantic comedy film directed by rajib biswas. the film stars dev, subhashree ganguly, nusrat jahan, tapas paul, rajatava dutta  and others. the film is a remake of the 2010 telugu film brindavanam starring n. t. rama rao jr., samantha ruth prabhu and kajal agarwal. the film was dubbed into hindi as "mere ustas 420".


== plot ==
in this story krish (played by dev) is the hero and bhoomi (played by subhashree ganguly) is the leading heroine. krish is the son of a rich man. krish (has  love interest in megha (nusrat jahan). megha also loves krish a.k.a. krishna. their relationship goes fine until megha meets bhoomi (subhashree ganguly), and they become best friends. bhoomi tells her best friend megha about his rowdy and tough cousin who her family wants her to marry, but she does not want to. megha gets worried about her friend and tells the problem to her boyfriend, krish. megha makes bhoomi meet krish and tells krish to act as if krish is bhoomi's boyfriend and let bhoomi's family know that bhoomi is in a relationship with krish. krish does not agree at first but later agrees to help out bhoomi. in the meantime, bhoomi fall in love with krish in reality. krish also gets close to bhoomi. later, one day krish gets to know that megha and bhoomi's fathers are step-brothers and they have a family rivalry between them from ages. krish meets the two brothers' father (haradhan bandopadhyay) and gets to know why they have the rivalry and also gets to know that grandfather wants them to be together again. the grandfather gives the responsibility to krish to get the two families together again and if he is successful he will get the hand in marriage of megha or bhoomi  whomever he is in love with. krish falls in a big problem as he is not interested in all this family rivalry. but later he decides to get the family together. in the meantime, megha gets the wrong idea that krish and bhoomi are cheating her and krish is in love with bhoomi and not her. due to the untimely death of late shri haradhan bandopadhay, the climax of the movie was changed which made it different from the original story of brindavanam where krish marries bhoomi as megha explained.


== cast ==
dev as krish
subhashree ganguly as bhoomi
nusrat jahan as megha
tapas paul as bhoomi's father (brojeshwar ganguly)
rajatava dutta as megha's father (mohanlal ganguly)
haradhan bandopadhyay as the grandfather of bhoomi and megha
partho sarathi chakraborty as hari
shubhajit bhowmik as krish's companion
supriyo dutta as krish's fake father
laboni sarkar as krish's mother
kunal padhy as krish's father
anjan mahato as krish's driver (kamol bhai)
joy badlani as biju, hari's father
pradip dhar as joy, bhoomi's uncle
madhumita chatterjee as megha's mother


== soundtrack ==
the album is scored by savvy.


== series ==
khokababu
khoka 420


== references ==


== external links ==
khoka 420 at imdb