starik khottabych (russian:  , old man khottabych or old khottabych) is a sovcolor soviet fantasy film produced in the ussr by goskino at  kinostudyia lenfilm (lenfilm studio) in 1956, based on a children's book of the same name by lazar lagin who also wrote the film's script, and directed by gennadi kazansky. in the united states, the film was released theatrically by sovexportfilm, with english subtitles, under the title the flying carpet through artkino pictures inc. in 1960.


== plot summary ==
volka, a 12-year-old soviet young pioneer, discovers an ancient vessel at the bottom of a river. when he opens it, a genie emerges. he calls himself hassan abdul-rahman ibn khattab, but volka renames him khottabych. the name khottabych is derived from the arabic name khattab with the russian patronymic suffix -ych, yielding a russian equivalent of ibn-khattab (son of khattab). khottabych later claims to be 3,732 years and 5 months old. the grateful khottabych is ready to fulfill any of volka's wishes, but it becomes clear that volka should use the powers of the genie carefully, for they can have some unforeseen undesirable results.


== cast ==
nikolay volkov (19021985) as hassan abdurrahman ibn khattab ("old khottabych"), jinn
alexey litvinov as volka
genya khudyskov as zhenya, his pal
lyeva kovalchuk as goga, the bully
marya blinova as volka's mother
vera romanova as goga's mother
olga cherkasova as varvara stepanovna, teacher
efim kopelyan as emir mukhammdov
aleksandr larikov as the doctor
and (roles not determined): yevgeni vesnik, boris kokovin, anatoli korolkevich, a. galin, v. kuznetsov, and m. stepanov


== production personnel ==
production director: tamara samoznaeva
producer: lev makhtin
screenplay by lazar lagin
directed by gennadi kazansky
cinematographer: muzakir shuruckov
art directors: isaak kaplan, bella manevich
composer: nadezhda simonyan
sound operator: grigory albertspecial effects team:

director of photography: mihail shamkovich
camera operators: b. durov, m. pocrovsky
art directors: a. alekseyev, mihail krotkin, maria kandat


== production notes ==
the novel is influenced by the tale of aladdin and his magical lamp, and it was quite popular with soviet kids. there were two major versions of the novel - the original was published in 1938, and a revised version followed in 1955. this later version was the basis of the 1956 film. revisions to the novel were made by lagin himself in order to incorporate the changes taking place in the ussr and the rest of the world into the narrative, including some ideological anti-capitalistic elements. the original edition has been republished in the post-soviet era.


== awards ==
1958 moscow international film festival award
1958 vancouver international film festival award


== video ==
early 1990s - russkoje video (vhs)
december 2003 - russian cinema councill (dvd). the disc contains four spoken languages in dolby digital 5.1: russian original, english voice-over, french and arabic languages; subtitles in russian, english, french, spanish, italian, dutch, japanese, swedish, german, portuguese, hebrew, arabic and chinese. it also contains special features "monologue in the intermission", "another genie", filmography and a photo album.


== see also ==
the brass bottle
hindi rusi bhai bhai


== external links ==
old khottabych at allmovie
old khottabych at imdb
old khottabych is available for free download at the internet archive
lazar lagin. the old genie hottabych (english translation) at maksim moshkow's library
old khottabych (movie for kids with english subtitles)


== references ==