khubsoorat (english: beautiful) is a 1980 indian hindi language comedy-drama film, directed and produced by hrishikesh mukherjee, with dialogues written by gulzar. the film stars rekha, rakesh roshan, ashok kumar, dina pathak and shashikala. the film received critical acclaim and was a box-office success.
the film won the 1981 filmfare award for best film. the lead actress, rekha, won her first filmfare best actress award for her role as manju dayal (she was also nominated for a role in the film judaai that year). the movie was remade in tamil as lakshmi vandhachu and in malayalam as vannu kandu keezhadakki. the 2014 film of the same name was loosely based on it and was disney's first live-action bollywood film.


== plot ==
middle aged nirmala gupta (dina pathak), wife of dwaraka prasad gupta (ashok kumar) and mother of four, is a disciplinarian and runs her household by rules. everyone, including her husband follow her rules though they don't always approve of her ways. she even selects wives for her sons herself, and now selects anju for her second son.
anju and manju (rekha) are the daughters of rich widower ram dayal (david). after the wedding, manju comes to stay with her sister for some time. being a playful and naughty girl, she immediately gets the disapproval of nirmala. but her third son inder (rakesh roshan), a young doctor, slowly grows close to manju.
manju also attracts the attention of dwaraka prasad, who was a fun loving fellow himself. he feels relieved with the presence of the playful manju after living for a long time under the controlling behaviour of his wife. manju gradually gains the trust of everyone in the house except nirmala.
one day, she performs a small play highlighting the tyranny of nirmala over other family members. nirmala was not believed to be at the house, but she accidentally sees it. she gets hurt as everyone thinks of her as a dictator, though she does everything for the well being of the family. moreover, the fact that everyone felt free with manju, an outsider, but not with her, hurts her more.
manju tries to apologize, but nirmala wouldn't talk to her. dwaraka prasad, seeing her adamant, gets emotionally upset and rants at her, which leads to him having a heart attack. nirmala gets tensed as everyone except manju left home for some wedding. manju acts timely and saves dwaraka prasad. at last, nirmala understands manju's character and she too approves of her. in the end, manju and inder get married.


== cast ==
rekha as manju dayal
ashok kumar as dwarka prasad gupta
rakesh roshan as inder gupta
shashikala as bari bhabhi
aradhana as anju gupta
dina pathak as nirmala gupta
david as ram dayal
s.n.banerjee as uma shankar
keshto mukherjee as ashrafi lal
ranjit chowdhry as jagan gupta
rupini (komal mahuvakar) as munni (credited as baby komal)
om shivpuri as doctor joshi (cameo appearance)
anand as doctor abbas
vijay sharma as chander gupta


== soundtrack ==


== awards ==
1981: filmfare best movie award - n.c. sippy, hrishikesh mukherjee.
1981: filmfare best actress award - rekha


== references ==


== external links ==
khubsoorat at imdb
"hrishikesh mukherjee's best films": khubsoorat (1980), rediff.com, 28 august 2006. retrieved 2 october 2009.