kick is a 2009 indian telugu-language action comedy film directed by surender reddy from a story by vakkantham vamsi. the film stars ravi teja, ileana, and shaam (in his telugu debut) while brahmanandam plays a supporting role. the film has music composed by s. thaman. released worldwide on 8 may 2009, the film is a commercial success.the film is remade in tamil as thillalangadi (2010), in hindi with the same name and in kannada as super ranga (2014). a sequel, kick 2 also starring teja and directed by reddy released in 2015.


== plot ==
naina, a chivalrous girl is given a marriage proposal by her father, who asks her to meet the bridegroom before agreeing. the bridegroom, kalyan krishna, and naina meet and discuss about each other. when kalyan krishna reveals his name, naina reveals that she dated a guy named kalyan previously. naina then narrates the story behind her relationship with kalyan. kalyan is a brilliant young man, but holds the world in contempt, due to always looking to get a kick out of everything. this attitude of wanting that special something which will give him the kick he needs, prevents him from doing anything or working in any particular job for long. naina first meets kalyan when she tries to help her friend with her love marriage with ajaam, her friend's driver. kalyan also comes to help ajaam with the marriage as the best man. naina develops an instant dislike towards kalyan, because of his attitude and character. naina wishes not to meet him again but is forced to do so for her sister when her sister reveals that she likes him.
knowing about kalyan's character and hoping to spoil the alliance, naina approaches him to sabotage the alliance and make her sister hate him. he agrees and does so, but then reveals that he is in love with naina. although naina is shocked and does not initially like him, she starts reciprocate his love slowly. eventually, naina tells kalyan that she likes him and they become good friends but does not tell him she loves him. on naina's suggestion, kalyan finds a job as a software engineer, though he resigns it shortly due to his attitude and tries to keep it a secret. unfortunately,  naina comes to know about it through her uncle and breaks up with him. after this episode, naina leaves for malaysia, where her parents live. after telling him her story kalyan agrees to marry naina and she agrees likewise. krishna then narrates his story as a very successful police officer. he is after a very daring thief, who is very crafty, cunning yet his identity unknown. this thief has been targeting all the rich people of hyderabad and has eluded the police every time including krishna, hence his obsession with him. the thief, later revealed to be none other than kalyan, escapes krishna again after his latest heist. after that kalyan contacts krishna, calling him his partner(after he had krishna unwittingly lead kalyan's latest target to a stash of hidden money belonging to a cabinet minister). calling him a loser, kalyan gives him a hint to his next heist, which krishna deduces is in malaysia, after realising the loser is actually the number of the flight he came in on, after inverting the letters.
krishna reveals to naina that this was the reason why he came to malaysia. naina unexpectedly runs into kalyan in malaysia where he is receiving treatment for memory loss, but in reality is a cover for his stay. naina, with the intention of making kalyan regain his memory and making him feel real bad by marrying krishna, has kalyan stay with her family and introduces him to krishna. she later discovers his lie and is enraged, but forgives him after he calls her out for her hastiness and judgement in marrying krishna when she actually loved kalyan deep down. krishna during the course of his investigation realises that kalyan is the thief after finding similarities between the thief and kalyan's phrases, and the heist he is planning is actually robbing the home minister who bought a large sum of money to malaysia which is unaccounted for and is being invested in a foreign firm. after robbing that money, kalyan encounters krishna and gets into a chase, which ends when krishna rear-ends kalyan's car and he crashes into the river, scattering the money in the process. kalyan's father later tells naina that after seeing a couple commit suicide to avoid the grief of seeing their daughter die, kalyan gathered the money for her surgery. upon seeing her happiness, kalyan realises he has found his calling and the thing that gives him a kick. meeting up with kalyan, krishna tells him that he will one day catch him red handed. kalyan then challenges krishna that before august 16th, he is going to perform his last heist: rob a huge election fund worth inr 500,00,00,000 and if krishna wants to catch him, he can only try and catch him then and after that he won't be able to. heading out to the heist, kalyan runs into krishna, who challenges him to do the heist in his presence. kalyan successfully performs the heist with krishna by ramming the wall of the office where the funds are being held and in the ensuing chaos, gets the money and runs away. he narrowly escapes when a group of school children holding a rally prevent the police from firing at him. krishna comes to know that all the money that kalyan stole was donated to all the children across the country anonymously, hence the rally for him. kalyan later becomes a police officer and surprises krishna at a cabinet meeting, where he tells him he is replacing him as the lead officer in the case, leading krishna to laugh and suggest to the home minister that kalyan is the man for the job. as the home minister remarks that he would like to see the thief's face, kalyan responds that since they have seen his face, it's as good as seeing the thief's face and that they're in for a real kick.


== cast ==


== production ==
in 2009 prior to the release of the film agam puram (2010), surender reddy chose tamil actor shaam to play a cop in the film kick upon looking on stills from that film. shaam learned telugu for the film.


== soundtrack ==
the audio was launched on 19 april 2009 at a function organized in taj deccan. d rama naidu, sv krishna reddy, vv vinayak, nitin, lion y kiran and meher ramesh attended this function as guests. d rama naidu launched the audio cd and gave the first unit to vv vinayak. sv krishna reddy launched the audiocassette and gave the first unit to meher ramesh.

all lyrics are written by sirivennela sitaramasastri.


== reception ==
kick received widely positive reviews. sify.com gave a review stating "the film has been made well but it could have better scenes. overall, since there are no other movies in sight now, kick being a paisa vasool movie will definitely have a good run at the box office." indiaglitz.com gave a review stating "the film attempts to provide complete entertainment from start to end and except two scenes where there is a sentiment and melodrama, the rest of the movie runs mostly on comedy and action along with few thrills and twists. but then the movie could have been a lot better if the speed was worked upon and also the fights were not much in the movie which could have pushed in more adrenaline. good mix of various elements, can be watched."shaam, a tamil actor, got his breakthrough in the telugu film industry through this film and as a result, he earned the name kick shaam.


== remakes and sequel ==
the film was remade in tamil as thillalangadi, in hindi as kick and in kannada as super ranga.sajid nadiadwala intended to remake this film with a. r. murugadoss as director. nadiadwala received an invitation from the korea tourism organization, and after his team visited south korea in september 2011, he signed an agreement to shoot portions of this project and others in that country. salman khan and jacqueline fernandez have signed on to act in the film, which was directed by nadiawala.a sequel was announced, titled as kick 2, with the same lead actor ravi teja, director surender reddy. music was again composed by s. thaman. the film is produced by actor nandamuri kalyan ram. it was launched on 10 august 2014 and was released worldwide on 21 aug 2015.


== references ==


== external links ==
kick at imdb