kids in america is a 2005 american comedy film directed by josh stolberg. it was written by andrew shaifer and stolberg. the film is inspired by real events. it received negative reviews from film critics.


== plot ==
inspired by real events, kids in america is a comedy about a diverse group of high school students who band together to peacefully stand for their personal rights and dignity. holden donovan and his love interest, charlotte pratt, are fed up with principal donna weller, who goes to great lengths to stop the students from enjoying their right to free expression, such as suspending monica rose for wearing condoms on her outfit to promote safe sex during spirit week and suspending lawrence reitzer for kissing another guy in the hallway. meanwhile, she's running for state school superintendent, which, if elected, will afford her the power to practice her brand of administration beyond booker high school. holden himself is suspended and ultimately expelled for speaking out publicly against weller, to whom he says, "you're nothing but a politician".
the students have an ally, mr. will drucker, one of their teachers who encourages them to fight for their rights. he pays a price for his position and is fired by principal weller. he decides to use his dismissal to make a change of his own, using his new-found free time to produce a documentary chronicling the experiences of students who are faced with similar issues. holden befriends a group of students, including libertarian charlotte pratt, voyeuristic punk-rock fan chuck mcginn, cheerleader katie carmichael, chinese-american emily chua, homosexual lawrence reitzer, african-american walanda jenkins, cheerleader kelly stepford, founder of the school's celibacy society monica rose, cheerleader ashley harris, and goth chick dementia. together, they engage in civil disobedience, passing out condoms and staging walk-outs, and organize the student body to take on principal weller and make a real change at booker high. due to their efforts, weller loses the election and subsequently quits her job.


== cast ==


=== students ===
gregory smith as holden donovan
stephanie sherrin as charlotte pratt
chris morris as chuck mcginn
caitlin wachs as katie carmichael
emy coligado as emily chua
alex anfanger as lawrence reitzer
crystal celeste grant as walanda jenkins
nicole richie as kelly stepford
rosalie ward as monica rose
genevieve cortese as ashley harris
rakefet abergel as goth girl
damien luvara as rick garcia
marcella lentz-pope as elizabeth goings
raymond braun as mo williams


=== faculty and staff ===
julie bowen as principal donna weller
malik yoba as mr. will drucker
andrew shaifer as mr. kip stratton
adam arkin as mr. ed mumsford
george wendt as coach thompson
jeff chase as asst. coach fasso
leila charles as ms. jane jordan (will drucker's girlfriend)


=== parents ===
samantha mathis as jennifer rose (monica's mother)
rosanna arquette as abby pratt (charlotte's mother)
elizabeth perkins as sandra carmichael (katie's mother)
charles shaughnessy as mr. carmichael (katie's father)
william earl brown as boss mcginn (chuck's father)
kim coles as loretta jenkins (walanda's mother)


== inspiration ==
this film was inspired by true events. three students in particular are interviewed at the end of the film, including:

lanessa riobe of osceola high school, who was suspended for taping condoms to her shirt in order to promote safe sex,
natalie nicky young, who was suspended for wearing a shirt proclaiming, barbie is a lesbian, and
rachel boim, who was suspended for writing a story about a girl experiencing a violent dream.


== soundtrack ==
the movie contains the following songs:

bonnie taylor shakedown - hellogoodbye
freedom ain't free - crystal celeste grant and steve kim
false alarm - the hometeam
hands 2 tha pump - da digger
you are my friend - brownskin
welcome to my world - nerf herder
race cars - allister
change the world - an angle
it ain't right - ilona
remembering britt - day at the fair
sesame smeshame - the early november
anthem - trevor hall
sunday in the public restroom with george - rand singer, alex anfanger and chris morris
symphony - i am the avalanche
she rules the school - daniel cieral
i want you - james blunt
if you were here - thompson twins
moving in stereo - the cars
exit, emergency - houston calls
my sleep pattern changed - the early november
knights of the island counter - david melillo
letters to summer - the track record
u and left turns - socratic
bad - ilona
the bad touch - the bloodhound gang
sydney - halifax
it's the end of the world as we know it (and i feel fine) - r.e.m.
somewhere on fullerton - allister
one more won't hurt - houston calls
all our words - long since forgotten
summertime - brother love


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
kids in america at imdb
kids in america at box office mojo