suicide squad: kill the justice league is an upcoming action-adventure shooter game developed by rocksteady studios and published by warner bros. interactive entertainment. it is set to be released in 2022 for microsoft windows, playstation 5, and xbox series x and series s. it is a continuation of the batman: arkham series and will be the first game in the series not to feature batman as the title character or the player protagonist. this game revolves around the titular team's attempts to defeat brainiac when he invades earth and brainwashes the justice league.


== gameplay ==
suicide squad: kill the justice league is a genre-bending action-adventure shooter  video game set in an open world based on metropolis. the game features four playable characters: harley quinn, deadshot, captain boomerang, and king shark. while it can be played solo, the game also features a four-player cooperative multiplayer mode. when played solo, players can switch between characters at will while the other characters are controlled by artificial intelligence.


== synopsis ==


=== setting ===
the game is set in the universe previously established by the batman: arkham series. it takes place in an open world metropolis, city of resident superhero, superman.


=== plot ===
the first trailer depicts brainiac attacking metropolis and the government task force known as the suicide squad - harley quinn (tara strong), captain boomerang, deadshot, and king shark (samoa joe) - being sent by amanda waller to investigate and kill the "alpha target". after a battle with brainiac's minions, the team has a run-in with superman, who is being mind-controlled by brainiac, revealed as the alpha target.


== development ==
a "hardcore violent" suicide squad game was first announced by then dc comics chief creative officer geoff johns in july 2010. in february 2012, he elaborated that the game was in development, adding that "because of the concept, you have a game where any of the lead characters can conceivably die and it's not a stunt. some really cool story could come out of that." the formation of the task force was teased at the end of batman: arkham origins in 2013 - developed by wb games montreal - which featured a post-credits scene in which deathstroke is asked by amanda waller to join the team, and in batman: arkham origins blackgate, in which deadshot and bronze tiger join the team with bane under consideration. in the years since batman: arkham knight released, there have been rumours suggesting that wb games montreal was working on a suicide squad game, but no official announcement was made from the development team or publisher. in december 2016, jason schreier from kotaku revealed that the title was cancelled, and the developer shifted their focus to the next batman game, centered on damian wayne; wb games montreal revealed the game gotham knights in august 2020.rocksteady studios, the creator of the batman: arkham franchise, was initially rumored to be working on a superman-themed game, which they later debunked. the first trailer for the game premiered at dc fandome on august 22, 2020. as the game is set in the "arkhamverse", plot threads established in the batman: arkham series would continue in suicide squad: kill the justice league. the game is set to be released for windows, playstation 5 and xbox series x in 2022. on april 13, 2021, the los angeles based company unbroken studios revealed through their website that they are assisting rocksteady in the developing of the game.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website