kill dil (transl.kill heart) is a 2014 indian hindi-language romantic action comedy film directed by shaad ali and produced by aditya chopra under the yash raj films banner. the film stars ranveer singh, ali zafar and parineeti chopra in lead roles with govinda portraying the antagonist. the film was released on 14 november 2014.


== plot ==
tutu (ali zafar) and dev (ranveer singh) are two orphans who were raised by a local gangster bhaiyaji (govinda) to be assassins. their life takes a turn when they meet disha (parineeti chopra) at a club and she and dev fall in love with each other. dev's indifference towards work starts irritating bhaiyaji, but tutu defends dev. when dev is unable to kill one of their targets, he decides to change his life. this enrages bhaiyaji and he threatens to kill dev. tutu intervenes and suggests dev lookout for a job but should accompany him every time bhaiyaji calls them to give killing contracts.
tutu gets dev a fake mba degree which helps dev join an insurance company. dev and disha make plans to get married, while disha is unaware of dev's past. bhaiyaji on learning the truth about dev's job decides to play a trick to get him back. he sends one of his goons, batuk, to kill dev and also informs tutu. he also calls up disha and tells her about dev and tutu's real identity. just when batuk is about to kill dev, tutu shoots him down in front of disha. disha is shocked with the reality and breaks up with dev. this results in dev again becoming an assassin.
bhaiyaji gives them a fresh contract to kill his arch-enemy baban pehlwan. dev and tutu record a video telling the tale of how they became gangsters and send it to disha. during a shootout, dev is again unable to fire the gun and gets shot. tutu takes him to the hospital, where after an operation, dev finds disha waiting for him and they both reconcile. bhaiyaji gets killed by baban pehlwan. dev and disha get married while tutu has a job interview in the same insurance company with a fake mba degree.


== cast ==
govinda as bhaiyaji
ranveer singh as dev
ali zafar as tutu
parineeti chopra as disha
alok nath as jeewan sambandh insurance owner
jass bhatia as chimsy
rocky verma as snake ladder player
sukhwinder singh as dulha in "happy budday" song


== production ==
parineeti chopra signed to the film, with govinda as the antagonist.early on in february 2014, many shots of the movie were taken in gautam buddha university and galgotias university, greater noida and also at grand venice greater noida. ali, ranveer singh and govinda share the dance floor in the movie. through march the film was shot at various locations in delhi. later in april 2014, a schedule of the film with leads ali zafar, ranveer singh and parineeti chopra was shot at lavasa and (kharghar) mumbai in maharashtra.


== critical reception ==
sukanya verma of rediff said "it has random songs, birdbrained logic and a romance that's about as exciting as toothpaste." saibal chaterjee from ndtv gave the film 2 stars and said "watch kill dil if you have plenty of time to kill. it is unlikely to deliver much joy to your dil, though." koimoi gave 2 stars and said the film has bad writing and poor direction. dna said that it fails to connect with audiences and gave 2 stars, while praising govinda's performance.


== box office reception ==
the film grossed 200 million (us$2.8 million) in india on its opening weekend, recouping most of its budget. overseas it collected 80.8 million (us$1.1 million) across its opening weekend, making 281 million (us$3.9 million) worldwide in its first three days. in pakistan, kill dil had the third-highest opening weekend gross of 2014 behind kick and happy new year. in its first week it collected a total of 290 million (us$4.1 million) according to box office india.


== soundtrack ==
the music of kill dil was composed by shankarehsaanloy (shankar mahadevan, ehsaan noorani and loy mendonsa), with lyrics by gulzar. the soundtrack comprises 8 songs. the soundtrack was released on 9 october 2014.
the title song of the film sung by sonu nigam and shankar mahadevan was released on 25 september 2014.
another single, "sweeta", sung by adnan sami, was released on 2 october 2014.


== references ==


== external links ==
kill dil at imdb