kishen kanhaiya is a  1990 indian hindi action comedy film directed by rakesh roshan, released in 1990. the film stars anil kapoor, shilpa shirodkar, madhuri dixit in lead roles.  this movie had a controversial transparent wet saree scene similar to mandakini's ram teri ganga maili.


== plot ==
leela and bholaram are a childless couple. leela is a midwife, and one day assists sunderdas' wife to give birth to twin boys. she decides to keep one baby for herself and tells sunderdas that his wife has given birth to one child. there are complications for the mother, and she passes away without seeing her children.
leela and bholaram bring up kanhaiya, while sunderdas attempts to bring up kishen, but is unable to do a good job. so he marries kamini, who comes along with her brother, ghendamal, to live at the estate. she has an illegitimate child named mahesh from another man. when sunderdas learns this, he is threatened and attacked. as a result, he is paralyzed, unable to move. kishen is brought up by kamini and ghendamal with a lot of abuse and intimidation. he is kept illiterate, so that he can blindly thumbprint whatever documents he is asked to sign.
kanhaiya is brought up to be a street-smart. fighter and movie-crazy young man. that's how he meets an equally movie-crazy, rich and spoilt girl, anju, and they fall in love.
the one secret that ties the brothers together is their reflex action  if one is injured the other feels the pain, too. only bhola makes the connection at a vital point in the story. kishen likes radha, a servant, and is married, but the atrocities do not stop. finally gendamal asks mahesh to kill kishen by throwing him off a cliff after getting the property papers. at the same time, kanhaiya learns of his past and returns to the ancestral mansion, shocking everyone. what also shocks everyone is his changed attitude. he denies his signatures on the papers signed by kishen. finally all the confusions are resolved. kishen and kanhaiya together fight the evil and achieve justice.


== cast ==
anil kapoor as kishen / kanhaiya (double role)
shilpa shirodkar as radha
madhuri dixit as anju
kader khan as munshi
saeed jaffrey as vidyacharan
ranjeet as shridhar
bindu as kamini
dalip tahil as mahesh
amrish puri as gendamal
sujit kumar as bholaram
shubha khote as leela
shreeram lagoo as sundardas
johnny lever as lobo
dinesh hingoo as lokhandwala
vikas anand as doctor


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack contains six songs. the music is composed by rajesh roshan, with lyrics written by indeevar and anwar sagar. the album includes songs sung by top singers like lata mangeshkar, asha bhosle, sadhana sargam, mohammed aziz, amit kumar, manhar udhas and nitin mukesh.


== external links ==
kishen kanhaiya at imdb