kismat (transl.destiny) is a 2004 indian hindi-language action film directed by guddu dhanoa, starring bobby deol and priyanka chopra in the lead roles. it also stars kabir bedi, sanjay narvekar,  smita jaykar and ashish vidyarthi. it was released throughout india and international territories in late 2004. this was the last film produced by time magnetics.


== plot ==
tony (bobby deol), works as a hit-man for a gangster, vikas patil (ashish vidyarthi), who owes his allegiance to wealthy raj mallya (kabir bedi). raj mallya has involved in marketing spurious and out-dated drugs, and as a result is the subject of an investigation by the food & drugs administration's inspector dr. hargobind gosai (mohan joshi). raj asks vikas to take care of hargobind through tony, which tony does, and in this manner, raj is absolved of all wrongdoing. then tony meets with an attractive starlet named, sapna (priyanka chopra), and falls head over heels in love with her. when sapna tells him that she is engaged to be married to dr. ajay saxena, he is heart-broken. then a scandal breaks out, and hargobind is implicated in the deaths of three children that were killed by raj's spurious drugs. all the evidence points against hargobind and not a single lawyer is willing to take his case; his wife kills herself, and the marriage of his daughter has been canceled. then tony finds out that hargobind is none other than sapna's dad  and he has ruined the only chance he had for marrying the girl of his dreams.


== cast ==
bobby deol as tony
priyanka chopra as sapna gosai
kabir bedi as raj mallya
sanjay narvekar as goli (toni's friend)
mohan joshi as dr. hargobind gosai
amit behl as dr ajay saxena, sapna fiancee
shahbaz khan as raj mallya's son
imran khan as vijay, elder son of raj mallya
smita jaykar as mrs. gosai
ashish vidyarthi as vikas patil
mushtaq khan as pankaj bhai (sapna's secretary)
veerendra saxena as sinha (mallya's secretary)


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by anand raj anand and the lyrics were penned by dev kohli. there are nine tracks in the album, including three instrumentals.


== references ==


== external links ==
kismat at imdb