knock out  is an indian hindi-language action-thriller film directed by mani shankar. released on 15 october 2010, the film stars sanjay dutt, irrfan khan and kangana ranaut. knock out is an unauthorized remake of phone booth. in october 2010, the bombay high court ordered the film's producers to pay a portion of their revenues to 20th century fox, who own the rights to phone booth. the film was a flop at the box office.


== cast ==
sanjay dutt as veer vijay singh, chief of ops, ib/colonel gill
kangana ranaut as nidhi srivastava, india tv reporter
irrfan khan as bachchoo bhai/ tony khosla
gulshan grover as bapuji
rukhsar rehman as lakshmi, tony's wife
sushant singh as inspector vikram
asif basra as raghav
bikramjeet kanwarpal as editor, nidhi's boss
kurush deboo as sandwichwala
abhay shukla as prithvi
shankar sachdeva as mishra
shriya sharma as sweety, tony's daughter
naseer abdullah as bhalla
namrata thapa as roshni
apoorva lakhia as ranvir singh
ashraful haque as junkie
shreya narayan as jesse
aparna as bharti
silvio simac as fighter on terrace
rajendra jadhav as gundurao
vinay verma as commissioner
m d pasha as suvarna
hussain shaikh as party president
gary warren d'souza as swiss bank manager
randheer nahar as pandey
shivraj as rbi officer


== plot ==
bachubhai (irrfan khan) has come to a phone booth to make a call. he is interrupted by a man who interrupts him again. bachubhai tells him to stop interrupting. while moving out of the phone booth after the call, the phone rings. bachubhai picks up the call only to get surprised by an unknown caller who ensures that bachubhai does not leave the phone booth until his motive of calling is achieved.  another man interrupts who is shot dead by that unknown person from a far away building. as seeing the incident, police, public and news reporter nidhi srivastav kangana ranaut arrive. everyone is seeing everything as bachubhai has been told to do what the person on the phone call says or he will shoot him. later, police officer sushant singh is transferred and another encounter specialist has been called. meanwhile, bachubhai, who is working for a corrupt politician who has 320 billion black money has been told to transfer the money on a government account to give back the money to the public. bachubhai does everything as the phone caller says. at the end of the movie, the money has been transferred to the public account and it is revealed that veer vijay singh (sanjay dutt) is a chief of investigation bureau. bachubhai, after transferring the money, nothing happens to him.


== reception ==
knock out was poorly received by critics. nikhat kazmi of the times of india rated the film 2 out of 5 stars.


== soundtrack ==
the film's music was given by gourov dasgupta, with a background score by atul raninga and sanjay wandrekar. the soundtrack has five original tunes, one remix and an alternate version of one song.


== references ==


== external links ==
knock out at imdb