kochi rajavu (translated as king of kochi) is a 2005  indian malayalam-language action-w comedy drama film, directed by johny antony. it stars dileep in the lead role with kavya madhavan, rambha, harisree ashokan, murali, jagathy sreekumar, vijayaraghavan, riyaz khan, santhosh, sadiq and vijayan in supporting roles.


== plot ==
the film starts with suryanarayana varma a.k.a. unni (dileep), who hails from a royal family, returning from prison. he had killed the son of a large family who are now searching for him. unni's parents enroll him in a law college in chennai. there he meets meenakshi (rambha) and gets into conflicts her brother siva (riyaz khan), and siva's enemy muthu (sudheer sukumaran). meenakshi eventually falls in love with unni. once meenaskshi's family finds out about her love for unni they visit his house for a marriage request. but unni has a past he can't escape, which he narrates in a flashback.
he tells how he met and fell in love with a woman named aswathy (kavya madhavan). aswathy's parents are dead, and she lives with her uncles, the eldest of whom (vijayaraghavan) wants to gain her inheritance by arranging a marriage between his son and aswathy. aswathy accidentally gets into the autorickshaw of unni when she is going to meet her future husband. during the ride, unni falls in love with her and delays bringing aswathy to her destination.
she becomes fed up with him and decides to tell her uncle. she and her uncle plan to make fun of him and calls unni to her house. unni learns that aswathy's uncle is the auto company owner and they beat him badly. she falls for him when she sees him being injured. they decide to get married and in the drama that follows unni kills aswathy's future husband. for this, he is jailed for 5 years. 
in the present day, unni believes aswathy has been married off, so he gets engaged to meenakshi. meanwhile, aswathy calls unni, telling him that she is still waiting for him. he goes to kerala to find her, and tries to escape with her in a truck. chased by aswathy's family and meenakshi's family they are saved finally by the autorickshaw drivers and get married.


== cast ==
dileep as suryanarayana varma a.k.a. unni
kavya madhavan as aswathy
rambha as meenakshi
harisree ashokan as komalan
murali as chandrashekhara menon
kalaranjini as lakshmi
jagathy sreekumar as maharaja moolam thirunal easwara varma
vijayan as parthasarathy
riyaz khan as shiva
vijayaraghavan as karimbarakkal prabhakaran
santhosh as karimbarakkal divakaran
sadiq as karimbarakkal sudhakaran
irshad as prakashan, prabhakaran's eldest son
kavi raj as prabhakaran's youngest son
mohan jose as ambbattur singam
sudheer sukumaran as 'maari' muthu
indrans as worker of canteen
thara as unni's sister
venniradai moorthy as p. r ananthamurthy, college principal
geetha salam as hamsa ikka, an auto driver
machan varghese as karali shishyan
nandhu pothuval as auto driver
kalabhavan haneef as auto driver
kalabhavan shajon as meenakshi's driver
ambika mohan as bhavani
ponnamma babu as kunjanamma
kavitha nair as meenakshi's friend
indulekha as jyothy
deepika mohan as jyothy's mother


== music ==
music : vidyasagar. vidyasagar later adapted the song "munthiri padam" in tamil as "aruviyoda" for the film pasa kiligal.


== references ==


== external links ==
kochi rajavu at imdb


== box office ==
the film was a blockbuster at the box office.