koi... mil gaya (hindi pronunciation: [ko ml aja]; transl.i have found someone...), also known by the initialism kmg, is a 2003 indian hindi-language science fiction film directed and produced by rakesh roshan. it stars hrithik roshan and preity zinta, with rekha playing a supporting role and rakesh roshan making a cameo appearance. the story was written by the lattermost, who also done the screenplay with sachin bhowmick, honey irani, and robin bhatt. koi... mil gaya focuses on rohit (hrithik roshan), a developmentally-disabled man who comes in contact with an extraterrestrial being by the computer of his late-father sanjay (rakesh roshan). the film follows his relationship with nisha (zinta), rohit's friend who later falls for him.
after the release of commercially and critically successful romantic film kaho naa... pyaar hai (2000), rakesh roshan wanted to work with his son, hrithik roshan, once again. he wanted this second collaboration, which was subsequently titled koi... mil gaya, to be different and not only have the genre he had used before in the previous project. in june 2001, during the 2nd iifa awards, he announced it while he was receiving the best director trophy for kaho naa... pyaar hai. principal photography was handled jointly by ravi k. chandran and sameer arya from november 2001 to march 2003 at the sets built by sharmishta roy in canada, india, and new zealand. rakesh roshan's brother, rajesh roshan, composed the soundtrack and background score for the film. the american artists mark clobe and craig mumma spent 40 million (us$560,000) on the visual effects.
made on a total budget between 250 million (us$3.5 million) and 350 million (us$4.9 million), koi... mil gaya was released on 8 august 2003 and marked the first installment in the krrish franchise. it was promoted with the tagline, "you are not alone...", targeting children and parents. a commercial success, the film emerged as the second-highest-earning indian film of the year, grossing 823.3 million (us$12 million) worldwide. it was met with a positive reception from critics, with most of the appreciation directed towards the cast's performances. two sequels, krrish and krrish 3, were released in 2006 and 2013, respectively. a fourth installment was announced in 2016 and scheduled to be release in december 2020, but it was postponed due to the covid-19 pandemic in india.
the recipient of several accolades, koi... mil gaya won three national film awards, including trophies for best film on other social issues. at the 49th filmfare awards, it was nominated in eleven categories and received five awards, including best film, best director for rakesh roshan, and best actor and best actor (critics) for hrithik roshan. in the fifth iteration of the international indian film academy awards, the film had five won out of eleven nominations, including best director (rakesh roshan) and best actor (hrithik roshan). the film is considered to be a milestone of its genre and recognized as the first indian film featuring aliens. the character jadoo also became popular and inspired a spin-off series titled j bole toh jadoo (2004).


== plot ==
sanjay mehra, a scientist, has created a computer from which he sends variations of the syllable om into space, hoping to attract extraterrestrial life. when he believes he has finally received a response, the scientific community mocks him. while driving home frustrated, an alien spacecraft appears overhead. distracted, sanjay drives off the road, causing the car to explode, killing him. his pregnant wife, sonia, survives with injuries; consequently, their son, rohit, is born with developmental disability. sonia learns that surgery is the only solution to rohit's disability, but it could result in paralysis or death. not wanting to lose her only remaining relation and sign of her husband, she declined it and raises him independently in kasauli.
a young woman, nisha, comes to the town and is initially antagonistic to rohit due to his childish practical jokes against her. this causes her friend, raj, and his four friends to attack rohit and break his kick scooter; sonia chastises them for assaulting rohit, saying that rohit did not intentionally make fun of her. realizing her mistake, nisha gifts rohit a bicycle and also introduces him to her mother and father, who are also sympathetic to him. rohit and nisha, now friends, find sanjay's old computer and rohit inadvertently summons the aliens. the visiting aliens leave in haste, accidentally leaving one from their group behind. rohit, nisha, his young friends, and sonia find and befriend the alien, naming him jadoo and discover his psychokinetic abilities.
raj does not like nisha getting close to rohit so raj bullies rohit and spreads a fake rumour that raj and nisha are getting married. it upsets nisha and rohit, who is hurt as he thought nisha was his girlfriend. jadoo discovers that rohit is abnormal and uses his powers, derived from sunlight, to enhance rohit's mental and intellectual ability. the next morning, rohit finds himself with clear vision; he later solves a tenth standard mathematics problem orally, despite being from seventh standard, surprising his mathematics teacher and even his school principal.
rohit's physical abilities are also increased to superhuman levels. later, raj and his friends challenge rohit and his friends to a basketball match. rohit uses his new physique to score several baskets during the match so raj and his friends begin to play dirty to win the game. after the sun comes out, jadoo helps rohit and his young friends to win the game. the now changed rohit meets nisha and her parents and confesses his love for her, which nisha now reciprocates.
raj's friends later corner rohit's friends over their supernatural performance at the basketball game. rohit's friends are forced to flee and jadoo accidentally falls from their grasp. the constable chelaram sukhwani sees jadoo in the bag and quickly calls and informs the other policemen. led by the inspector khurshid khan, they come and capture the bag although rohit arrives in time to rescue jadoo. he is confronted by raj and his friends. rohit, now infuriated, easily takes down raj and his friends, but not before the policemen catch up to him. it is then revealed that jadoo is not in the bag and had escaped when chelaram was busy calling and talking to the policemen.
khurshid, however, is suspicious of rohit and confronts him at his house with his group. the policemen take jadoo and knock rohit out. when he regains consciousness, rohit uses his super-speed to catch up to the police cars and arrives just in time to save jadoo from being taken to the united states. the flying saucer, which he had summoned with his father's computer beforehand, arrives back and rohit bids a sad farewell to jadoo. as jadoo leaves, rohit loses his superpowers and reverts to his disabled self. this saves him from prosecution by the government of india who felicitate him for his actions.
later, raj and his friends return to harass rohit and challenge him to kick a ball to them. an enraged rohit kicks the ball into the bully's face as jadoo returns rohit's superpowers permanently. rohit and nisha thank jadoo and get married.


== cast ==
the cast is listed below:


== production ==


=== development ===
following the success of the romantic thriller kaho naa... pyaar hai (2000), the director rakesh roshan wanted to collaborate with his son, hrithik roshan, who starred in the film alongside the debutante ameesha patel, once again. the director wanted his next project to be a children-centric film, not only have the romantic genre, which rakesh roshan had done many times in his career both as a director and actor. he told bollywood hungama that he was motivated to make a film that was not "run-of-the-mill" but "an out-of-the-box yet entertaining, mainstream film", after attending the premiere of lagaan in june 2001 during the 2nd iifa awards. he subsequently announced it at the ceremony while he was receiving the best director award for kaho naa... pyaar hai. the idea to make a film on the extraterrestrial life came up when he saw his five-year-old granddaughter watching a series about it on a unmentioned cartoon network. he later informed hrithik roshan this project when the latter was shooting for the 2001 release yaadein in delhi; hrithik roshan accepted the role immediately.rakesh roshan used a "k" as the film's initial, his favourite letter that was used in all of his directorial ventures. the film was originally titled koi aap jaisa (transl.someone like you, koi... tumsa nahin (transl.no one... is like you), and kaisa jaadu kiya (transl.what kind of magic), before koi... mil gaya (transl.i have found someone...) was finally chosen. along with sachin bhowmick, honey irani, and robin bhatt, he wrote the screenplay between two and three weeks and its first draft was done in khandala. unfamiliar with the topic, rakesh roshan confessed that he was initially reluctant and doubtful of the project, but hrithik roshan convinced him. according to rakesh roshan, the screenwriters were "contributing new ideas since the premise itself was so new". he described it as "a very emotional, thematic film" and "the greatest challenge" of his life, and said that science fiction was not the main part from the film. javed siddiqui finished the dialogue. koi... mil gaya was produced by rakesh roshan under filmkraft productions, which he established in 1980, and distributed by yash raj films.


=== casting ===

when koi... mil gaya was announced, rakesh roshan stated that his son hrithik roshan and preity zinta would play the lead roles in the film; it marked the actors' second collaboration after mission kashmir (2000). playing against type, roshan was cast as the developmentally-disabled man rohit. he admitted that the role had reminded him of his childhood, saying that he could eat as many chocolates as he wanted and "became a baby and everybody was so caring towards me". hrithik roshan cited it as the "most challenging role" of his career, but revealed he had accepted the part since his father offered him for the first time, confessing that his excitement made the role feel much easier. in a retrospective interview to mint, he explained that he "revisited that earlier passion i had felt when i did my first film". to provide an accurate portrayal, hrithik roshan lost 8 kilograms of his weight, changing his hairstyle, and wear loose clothes to cover his well-built body.zinta was given with the role of rohit's friend and then-wife, nisha, after rakesh roshan saw her 20-minute performance in mani ratnam's 1998 thriller dil se.. and was impressed by it. it was originally to be played by aishwarya rai bachchan or kareena kapoor; however, he saw that rai bachchan would not be a suitable co-actor as she was older than hrithik roshan, while kapoor opted out because she had collaborated with the actor in many projects. zinta, who enjoyed with her part as nisha and called koi... mil gaya a special film for her, described the role as an attempt to change her "conventional heroine" image, telling rediff.com that: "if i only did the glam-and-pout act, i would have stuck out like a sore thumb and destroyed the film's timeless texture." the part proved to be a new challenge for her, and she further found it to be her career's "toughest" role as it was "a very-controlled character". hrithik roshan spoke positively of his rapport with her, and said he would "have been only half effective" if she was not his co-star.in july 2001, rekha joined the casting and portrays rohit's mother sonia, a part that was specifically written by rakesh roshan to her. rakesh roshan recommended her for playing the character soon when he had done the writing of the film's screenplay. "i didnt even have a back-up artiste in mind for her role. if she had turned me down, i wonder what i would've done", he told filmfare. discussing the film and its casting with the press, hrithik roshan stated that she was the best on-screen mother and called her "marvellous". rekha herself saw that her part was "not too big", but believed that the role's motherhood aspect made it "worthwhile". the film was her second project with zinta subsequent to dil hai tumhaara in 2002; it also reunited her with rakesh roshan after both worked together in several films, such as khubsoorat (1980) and khoon bhari maang (1989). after anil kapoor, jackie shroff, and rishi kapoor rejected the role, rakesh roshan decided to play the brief role of rohit's father and sonia's husband, the scientist sanjay. the film thus marked his comeback to acting since the 1999 comedy-drama mother.indravadan j. purohit got the part as the alien jadoo. according to him, rakesh roshan had offered the role to 30 or 40 people before he gave it to him without any screen tests. to prepare, purohit lost several kilograms of his weights, joined gym, and had a strict diet. four months prior to the beginning of the film's shooting, he went to australia to model his 15-kilogram and 3-feet animatronical costume, which was created by the australian artists james colmer and lara denman from bimini special effects studios. they were both emotional when rakesh roshan narrates the film's screenplay, and they later showed a number of sketchs for the costume that were drew in a half-hour each; the costume itself was created in a period of eight months or more than a year, and costed 100 million (us$1.4 million). due to its heavy weight, purohit needed artificial oxygen after shooting for every of his scenes to avoid him from suffocating. having starred in more than 300 films (all of which featuring him in comic roles), he thought he never satisfied with the occupation, but with koi... mil gaya he got "a role of a lifetime" and considered the film to be his career's boost.


=== filming ===

the principal photography of koi... mil gaya was commenced on 12 november 2001, during the dhanteras celebration, in film city. the total budget ranged of 250 million (us$3.5 million) to 350 million (us$4.9 million), making its the most expensive film rakesh roshan ever made at the time. ravi k. chandran and sameer arya were the cinematographer, while sharmishta roy was the production designer. rocky star and komal shahani designed the costumes for the rest of the cast. farah khan, raju khan, and ganesh hegde served as the choreographers, and allan amin and tinu verma did the action direction. a mall replica was built in the film complex for the film's 14-day shooting schedule. a schedule in canada was finished after three days. in september 2002, the entertainment portal bollywood hungama reported that the film was 40 percent completed.chandran used shadows and smoke to make the film's sets look dark for the scenes that feature aliens, as he face difficulties when shoot those in bright light. the spaceship, by which jadoo visited earth in the film, was designed by colmer and denman and built in a year. during the filming, hrithik roshan was also doing the shooting for his three other projectsna tum jaano na hum (2002), mujhse dosti karoge! (2002), and main prem ki diwani hoon (2003). koi... mil gaya also taking place bali, rajasthan, bhimtal, western europe, kasauli, nainital, and new zealand. in 2018, rakesh roshan revealed that its climax sequences were shot in two different versions: in the first one, rohit will lose all of his powers after jadoo leaving from earth, while in the second, rohit will not lose those. after hearing opinions from many directors (such as aditya chopra, karan johar, subhash ghai, and yash chopra, he decided to use the latter ending, presuming the audience would get satisfied by it.the shooting ended in march 2003, and koi... mil gaya was edited by sanjay verma. with help from the bangalore-based company compudyne winfosys, the american artists marc klobe and craig mumma, who previously collaborated together in the science fiction films independence day (1996) and godzilla (1998), involved in the special effects. they were enthusiastic with their first bollywood project, and rakesh roshan asked them to be thrifty for the budget; they spent 40 million (us$560,000). nonetheless, the director confessed that the film's total cost was still excess for him and attributed this problem to the special effects and the making of jadoo's costumes.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack and background score for koi... mil gaya were composed by rajesh roshan. having work with his brother rakesh roshan for several times, he said that this one was more difficult among his other compositions and used the same technique he used in kaho naa... pyaar hai. ibrahim ashk, nasir faraaz, and dev kohli wrote the lyrics, while the vocals were performed by udit narayan, k. s. chithra, alka yagnik, tarsame singh saini, shaan, kavita krishnamurti, baby sneha, adnan sami, and preeti uttam singh. the album was sold for 50 million (us$700,000) to saregama, by which it was released on 11 june 2003.critical response to the album was positive, and rajesh roshan confessed he never received that much appreciation. joginder tuteja of bollywood hungama concluded, "in all, the music ... doesn't disappoint. though we may not be able to compare it's music with the earlier kaho naa... pyaar hai by the same team, it has it's share of plus points going in it's favour." planet bollywood's anish khanna declared "jaadoo jaadoo" as the best song from the soundtrack album. in a less-positive review, narendra kusnur from mid day gave the album two-and-a-half stars and opined that it "loses out on consistency". the hindu concluded the title song was "the unique selling point" of the film, referring it as a "sonorous number" and praised chithra's singing. the critic added, "the lyrics of all the songs are simple and easily understandable. rajesh roshan is able to impart a certain freshness to the music."according to the film-trade website box office india, the soundtrack album sold 2.1 million copies and became the fourth-highest-selling bollywood soundtrack of the year.


== release and reception ==


=== marketing and release ===
koi... mil gaya was one of the most anticipated indian films of 2003, owing to its science fiction genre that was rarely used by any bollywood films prior to the film and the character jadoo. promoted with the tagline, "you are not alone...", the film was targeted to children and parents. the teasers, which was created by the mumbai-based company prime focus, were aired on television for a week. the central board of film certification finished the censorship of the film on 25 july and gave it an u (suitable for all age groups) certification. koi... mil gaya garnered high expectation from trade analysts as well, which left hrithik roshan restless; after seeing its promotional trailers, komal nahta, the editor of the trade magazine film information, reported: "this has been my gut feeling ever since i heard the narration of the film concept. but the magic of the film comes across even through the promos." amod mehra said that the film's themes would successfully attract an audience, giving "adults ... a chance to relive their childhood". sharing the same sentiments, the critic and film trade observer taran adarsh added that "the combination of hrithik, rakesh and rajesh roshan" would make its opening "bumper".a special screening was held for the prime minister atal bihari vajpayee and the deputy prime minister lal krishna advani along with their families on 2 august 2003 in mumbai. after watching the film, vajpayee told rakesh roshan that he had made "a very good film". the film was theatrically released six days later and clashed with vikram bhatt's footpath and satish kaushik's tere naam. according to rediff.com's syed firdaus ashraf, who attended its premiere in mumbai, he saw that children would continuously shout, "jadoo! jadoo!". beside that, he also reported that the film's tickets were illegally sold by black marketeers in a higher price. as parts of the promotion, mtv managed a special show for the film, titled mtv making of the movie (containing interviews of the cast and crew) which aired between 10 and 14 august. it was screened at the 2nd international special film festival (organized by actionaid) on 1420 march 2003 and the 15th natfilm festival on 11 april. a german-dubbed version was released under the title of sternenkind (transl.star child) in germany, austria, and switzerland during the christmas of 2005.koi... mil gaya was released on blu-ray on the same day of its theatrical premiere. distributed by yash raj films, it was released on dvd on 15 september 2003 in a single-disc pack. it is also available on cd and vcd distributed by moser baer and eros international, respectively. according to an estimation by the economic times, in june 2004, the dvd version was sold around 15,000 units, while for the vcd version was 150,000 units; the film thus grossed 40 million (us$560,000). eros international released its triple-disc cd version in the ntsc widescreen format as well. the television rights to koi... mil gaya were sold to sony entertainment television in february 2004, and the worldwide premiere was occurred on 24 october. the film has became accessible for streaming on netflix and amazon prime video since 30 november 2016.


=== critical response ===
koi... mil gaya was opened to a critical positive reception, with most of them applauded the cast's performances (mostly that of hrithik roshan). conversely, rekha and zinta were panned because several critics found them to be "utterly wasted" and only served as the film's "decorative piece[s]". in spite of that, the former actress was better received. it received a rating of 75 percent on rotten tomatoes based on eight reviews, with an average rating of 5.4 out of 10. udita jhunjhunwala of mid day observed, "you walk into koi... mil gaya expecting to find a mysterious alien, what you end up discovering is a child inside you." she further praised roshan for his performance in "his bravest role". bollywood hungama noted, "hrithik roshan dominates the show and packs in a power-packed performance. the role of a mentally-challenged person is no cakewalk, but the actor takes to it like a fish takes to water. he manages to pull off the zero-to-hero routine exceptionally well. as an actor, he scales dizzier heights with this splendid performance". rediff.com's r. swaminathan called the actor "the turbojet that propels the film to the realm of the extraordinary", and believed that the film's screenplay and dialogues gave his character "flesh and blood". however, he felt jadoo's design was "a big letdown" in the film, saying that it was "plasticky" and "does not exude life".writing for the afternoon despatch & courier, deepa gahlot described koi... mil gaya as "a great demo of the bollywood style of filmmaking", but criticized its scientific inaccuracy. manjulaa s. negi of hindustan times was not satisfied by the special effects and compared those to the one from independence day (1996). screen's editor bhawana somaaya was appreciative of hrithik roshan's performance, finding it to be "very sincere" and "brave", and also took note of the film's "refreshing" subject. with similar views, dinesh raheja saw that he had delivered "a cherish-worthy performance". both critics added the child's actors, who accompanying hrithik roshan's character throughout the film, positively contributed to his performance. ziya us salam was sure rekha was underdeveloped and lata khubchandani, in her review for sify, questioned about why she was cast for the role; khalid mohamed, who gave the film four stars, presumed that her role made her "restrained", the same opinion nahta also stated. on zinta's performance, nahta opined: "preity zinta does not have a very significant role in terms of the value she adds although she has a running role. she looks pretty and acts well." vijay venkataramanan of planet bollywood appreciated rekha's strong chemistry with hrithik roshan.chitra mahesh from the hindu commended hrithik roshan along with the cast of the children, while referred to the character jadoo as "amateurish". in his five-star review published by b4u, parag chandrabala maniar lauded the efforts rakesh roshan had "to provide pure and clean entertainment" and kolbe's and mumma's special effects. he said of hrithik roshan, "[he] proves his versatility as an actor. at times he moves you and at others he makes you laugh. here's is definitely an actor to reckon with. the number of flops notwithstanding, hrithik roshan is here to stay." meenakshi rao of the pioneer complimented his acting style, considering him to be "endearing, as endearing as a child of his mental age". the times of india's omar qureshi elaborated, "hrithik blows away all doubts, theories, criticisms and disbelief with an extraordinarily touching performance of a mentally challenged boy in a rough man's world. he surprises you with his reserves of pathos, his gamut of emotion and his transition from weak boy to strong man. here is a sterling act, worthy of all awards this yearthus far. he is simply incredible, even in his voice modulations, his sloppy walk and his lopsided smile." an indo-asian news service critic wrote that the pairing of hrithik roshan and preity zinta in the film took "the couple conventions of hindi cinema far beyond the escapades of typical hindi cinema".overseas critics placed their attention to hrithik roshan's performances and the themes of the film. grady hendrix of film comment commented that the film was "a embarrassment of riches", summarizing, "... it's mockable, it's silly, it's cloaked in a cloying miasma of cute, but its off-handed facility with pop-cinema conventions, spiced up with some jarring stylistic disconnects, delivers the most mind-bending entertainment experience of the season. this is commercial moviemaking taken to its logical, mondo mercantilist conclusion." m. j. simpson expressed approval of its entire cast, especially hrithik roshan, whom he regarded as the film's "oddest aspect". calling it "bright, loud and relentless fun", jrgen fauth gave the film three-and-a-half-out-of-five stars and positively reviewed its comedic, romantic, science-fictional, musical, actional, and melodramatic elements. empire magazine hailed it as the "most novel bollywood movie of the year". the bbc's manish gajjar named hrithik roshan's role a "mentally-retarded-child-[turned]-superman-hero". derek elley acclaimed him for avoiding his typecasting as a romantic hero, while david parkinson of radio times thought that the film had served as a "slick, sentimental entertainment". writing for tv guide, maitland mcdonagh singled out jadoo's expression in the scene where he is lost in a forest for praise.


=== box office ===
koi... mil gaya was successful at the box office, due to the audience's sympathy for hrithik roshan's character as a man with developmental disability and trade analysts speculated the film would be an "acid test" for the actor. the film was released on 450 screens across india and grossed 22.5 million (us$320,000) on its opening day, the year's second-highest first-day earnings. it grossed 64.5 million (us$900,000) by the end of its opening weekend, and 129 million (us$1.8 million) after its first week. koi... mil gaya earned a total of 724.9 million (us$10 million) in india, becoming the highest-grossing indian film of 2003.abroad, the film was not much received by the audience. as reported by rediff.com, it debuted in 29th place in north america, where it was released in 55 screens, and grossed less than $300,000 after a three-day run. following its first weekend, the film had collected 32 million (us$450,000). it earned 98.4 (us$1.40) after finishing its overseas theatrical run, becoming the fifth-highest-grossing indian film of the year. summing the film's total gross in india and overseas, the film-trade website box office india estimated koi... mil gaya grossed 823.3 million (us$12 million), making itself 2003's second-highest-grossing indian film.


== accolades ==

koi... mil gaya won three awards at the 51st national film awards, including national film award for best film on other social issues tied with prakash jha's crime film gangaajal. at the 49th filmfare awards, the film was nominated for eleven categories includes best actress (zinta), best supporting actress (rekha), best performance in a comic role (johnny lever), and best music director (rajesh roshan). it went on to win five trophies, which includes best film, best director for rakesh roshan, and best actor and best actor (critics) for hrithik roshan. in the sixth iteration of the bollywood movie awards, hrithik roshan received best actor and best actor (critics), while rekha was acknowledged as the best supporting actress of the year. the film won five out of eleven nominations at the fifth ceremony of the international indian film academy awards, including best director (rakesh roshan) and best actor (hrithik roshan). it also got five screen awards, five zee cine awards, four producers guild film awards, and two stardust awards.


== legacy ==
koi... mil gaya, often abbreviated as kmg, has been widely regarded as the first indian science fiction film with alien characters in it, although the presumption was denied by several film experts. in the liverpool companion to world science fiction film (2014), the professors jessica langer and dominic alessio wrote that the tamil-language film kalai arasi (1963) should received the title.:56 however, writing for an article published in the new york times, the critic and author anupama chopra agreed that it is koi... mil gaya. the bbc reported that the film "is certainly a milestone in the reformation of commercial indian cinema as a whole", and the american graphic artist aaron marcus, in his 2014 book design, user experience, and usability: health, learning, playing, cultural, and cross-cultural user experience called it the most popular bollywood science fiction film.:75 republic world said that the film had reinvented the science fiction genre in bollywood and set a new standard for special effects in indian cinema. in 2016, mint featured koi... mil gaya in the listings of "children's day: 10 memorable bollywood films" and "ten bollywood films dealing with disability".after making his debut in kaho naa... pyaar hai (2000), hrithik roshan starred in a series of romantic films, most of which were financially underperformedsuch as yaadein (2001), aap mujhe achche lagne lage (2002) and na tum jaano na hum (2002)and trade analysts believed that his career had ended by these failures. even so, the release of koi... mil gaya, which hrithik roshan wanted to become his career's resurgence, changed their perspectives of the actor and suggested that the film revived his position in the industry. when attending its premiere, nahta told rediff.com that it was "very important for him. hrithik is not 'out' of the industry but his position is shaky. so, if the audience likes the film, it is good for him." in 2010, filmfare magazine included his performance in the listing of "80 iconic performances" of hindi cinema, writing, "its incredible how the actor manages to diminish his size, unstylise his look, wear bug-eyed glasses and talk funny ... watch him laugh, cry or bond with his remote controlled alien friend and note his nuanced turn." he and zinta collaborated once more in the war drama lakshya (2004), which was failed at the box office while received positive feedback.koi... mil gaya was remade into a soap opera in indonesia under the title of si yoyo (20032007). post the film success, jadoo became popular among children. nickelodeon india aired a spin-off television series based on the character, titled j bole toh jadoo, in 2004. in 2020, after the united states department of defense published footages of an unidentified flying object, internet memes relating to the film went viral; most of which uses the scene where rohit summons aliens by his father's computer.


== sequel ==

koi... mil gaya is the first installment in the krrish franchise. in november 2004, in an interview to subhash k. jha of rediff.com, hrithik roshan announced that his father, rakesh roshan, had begun the production of a sequel to koi... mil gaya, after the latter done its screenplay which was written in eight or nine months. a superhero film titled krrish, hrithik roshan would play a dual role, reprising his part as rohit from the predecessor and playing the character's eponymous son. while rekha also reprised her role in the sequel, zinta's position as the female lead was given to priyanka chopra. produced on a budget of 500 million (us$7.0 million), the principal photography started in march 2005 and finished in january 2006. krrish was opened on 23 june 2006 to mixed reviews, with critics were disappointed by the replacement of zinta. however, commercially, the film was successful and became the second-highest-grossing indian film that year, earning more than 1 billion (us$14 million).a second superhero sequel, krrish 3, was announced in december 2006. hrithik roshan and chopra portray the same roles they have previously did in the sequel's predecessor, while vivek oberoi and kangana ranaut play the antagonist parts. the film was originally scheduled to be release as a 3d film, but the idea was cancelled because of the temporal lack. although rakesh roshan never officially confirmed its budget, reports from the media estimated it to be above 1 billion (us$14 million). filming happened between december 2011 and june 2012. krrish 3 premiered on 4 november 2013 and was declared a commercial success, emerging as the fourth-highest-grossing indian film of the year. meanwhile, critics panned its lack of originality yet hrithik roshan's performance garnered praise. as of may 2021, the fourth successor krrish 4 was to be release in christmas 2020 but faced a postponement due to the covid-19 pandemic in india.


== see also ==
science fiction films in india


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
koi... mil gaya at imdb
koi... mil gaya at box office mojo