kondaveeti donga (transl.the thief of kondaveedu) is an indian 1990 telugu-language vigilante action film directed by a. kodandarami reddy starring chiranjeevi, vijayashanti and radha in key roles. upon release, the film received positive reviews, and emerged as a blockbuster at the box office.
subsequently, the film was dubbed into tamil as thangamalai thirudan.  the technically brilliant film was the first telugu film to be released on a 70 mm with 6-track stereophonic sound. the production design by bhaskar raju, with background score, and music by ilaiyaraaja received positive reviews. the film had collected a distributors share of  7.4 million on its opening weekend.


== plot ==
an orphan kondaveeti raja m.a.,l.l.b.,i.a.s. (chiranjeevi) is raised through the support of people living in the tribal village of kondaveedu. upon his return from hyderabad, he witnesses the failed legal system and the village being engulfed in political corruption, forgery, smuggling, money laundering, drug trafficking, land grabbing and alcohol abuse carried out by the local mafia and landlords (sarabhoji (rao gopal rao), narasimham (mohan babu) and khaadra (amrish puri)), who impose taxes on farmers. instead of being in the system and taking the direct route as an administrator himself, he transforms into a robin hood for the village and indulges in swashbuckling heists of money and paddy worth several crores from the landlords while being in disguise, much to the frustration of corrupt officials. he funds the tribals into self-sustaining farmers, while providing food, irrigation, healthcare, shelter and education to the poor and transforms the village.


== cast ==
chiranjeevi as kondaveeti raja, a man raised by the tribals. he becomes kondaveeti donga (like robin hood) to fight the evil.
vijayashanti as sri lekha, an undercover police officer appointed to capture kondaveeti donga, who later becomes raja's love interest.
radha sri kanya, a home surgeon serving in the tribal area of kondaveedu. she is the first person to find out the truth about kondaveeti donga.
rao gopal rao as sarabhoji, landlord
mohan babu as narasimham, landlord
amrish puri as khaadra and yugandhar
sarada as sambhavi
kaikala satyanarayana as das
nagendra babu
brahmanandam
allu rama lingaiah
nirmalamma
kallu chidambaram
chalapathi rao
ranganath
srividya as justice sandya
divyavani
master suresh


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack composed by ilaiyaraaja was an instant chart buster. all songs remain popular to date. except chamaku chamaku song all songs written by veturi. chamaku chamaku is written by sirivennela, the same can be seen in the titles of movie and sirivennela tarangaalu book too.


=== telugu (original soundtrack) ===
all music is composed by ilaiyaraaja.


== reception ==
giddaluri gopalrao of zamin ryot, writing his review on 23 march 1990, gave a positive review for the film. gopalrao praised the screenplay by yandamuri and chiranjeevi's performance however criticized the weak story by paruchuri brothers.


== references ==


== external links ==