kranti is a 2006 bengali film directed by riingo banerjee and produced under the banner of eskay movies. the film features actors jeet and swastika mukherjee in the lead roles. this film marks the directorial debut of riingo banerjee, who also composed the music for the film. the film was a big success in the career of jeet. the film also was a commercial success. ashish vidyarthi was vishnu (the mafia leader) in this film. the film is an adaptation of the telugu film siva.


== plot ==
jeet (jeet) is a student whose family, consisting of his parents and elder sister devashree (locket chatterjee), migrated to the city. since their arrival, they have to struggle amongst the crowd to exist. people of the city fear vishnu (ashish vidyarthi), the local don. his younger brother deva (rishi kaushik) studies in the same college as that of jeet. deva's gang in the college are the biggest troublemakers, who tease girls and pass bad comments at them. jeet, who tries to handle the situation, clashes with deva's gang for a number of times and beats his gang members. in retaliation, vishnu's goons start attacking his family members and friends. one day they spot devashree on the road and assaults her. they rape her one by one in public. they also kill his intimate college friend iqbal (biswanath basu) and finally kill his father (bodhisatwa majumdar). a helpless and heartbroken jeet is left with nothing, but only a strong desire to punish the wrongdoers. he becomes determined to kill vishnu. in the end, jeet is successful in killing deva and vishnu, thus fulfilling his revenge.


== cast ==
jeet as jeet
swastika mukherjee as arpita
alokananda roy as jeet's mother
ashish vidyarthi as vishnu, a dreaded gangster supported by politicians
bodhisattwa majumdar as jeet's father
locket chatterjee as debashree, jeet's elder sister
biswanath basu as iqbal
raja chattopadhyay
rishi kaushik as deva, vishnu's younger brother
rajesh sharma as inspector


== soundtrack ==

all music is composed by jeet gannguli, som-rishi-samidh, riingo banerjee, which is his only work as a film score composer..


== references ==