krrish  (hindi pronunciation: [kr]) is a 2006 indian hindi-language superhero film directed and produced by rakesh roshan. it stars hrithik roshan and priyanka chopra while naseeruddin shah, rekha, manini mishra, archana puran singh and sharat saxena feature in supporting roles. it is the second installment in the krrish franchise, being the sequel to koi... mil gaya, and relates the story of krishna, the son of the previous film's protagonists, who inherits his father's superhuman abilities. after falling in love with priya, he follows her to singapore, where he takes on the persona of "krrish" to keep his identity secret while saving children from a burning circus. from that moment on he is regarded as a superhero, and must later thwart the plans of the evil dr. arya, who has a connection to krishna's father, rohit, the protagonist of the previous film.
krrish  was conceived to be a film of global significance and a trendsetter in indian cinema, with visual effects on par with those from hollywood. to that end, the effects team was aided by hollywood's marc kolbe and craig mumma, and the stunts were choreographed by chinese martial arts film expert tony ching. the music was composed by rajesh roshan, with the background score by salim-sulaiman. filming was done to a large extent in singapore as well as india.
the film was released worldwide on 23 june 2006 at a budget of 40 crore and on 1000 prints, both near-record amounts for an indian film at the time. krrish received mixed reviews from critics in india, but got a record opening week at the box office. a blockbuster, krrish grossed a worldwide total of 126 crore, becoming the third highest-grossing indian film of 2006.
krrish received 8 nominations at the 52nd filmfare awards, including best film, best director, best actor for roshan and best supporting actress for rekha, and won 3, including best special effects. at the 2007 iifa awards, the film received 9 nominations and won 3, including best actor for roshan. it also won the national film award for best special effects. the third film in the series, krrish 3 was released in 2013.


== plot ==

five-year-old krishna mehra is the son of the late scientist, dr. rohit (hrithik roshan) and his late wife nisha (preity zinta). he lives in the town of kasauli. he undergoes an intelligence quotient (iq) test by his catholic school principal (akash khurana), who suspects that krishna has superpowers, due to krishna answering all the questions flawlessly. his grandmother, sonia (rekha), takes the young krishna to a remote mountain village to conceal his unique abilities. years later, krishna (hrithik roshan) meets vacationing friends, priya kalyanan (priyanka chopra) and honey arora (manini mishra), who both live in singapore. krishna's friend bahadur (hemant pandey) takes the girls' camping crew, led by komal singh (puneet issar), near his home to camp. krishna saves priya from a hang glider accident and falls in love with her when spending time with her.
after returning home to singapore, priya and honey are fired by their boss, nayantara (archana puran singh), for taking a non-permitted extension of 5-days in their vacation. to keep their jobs, honey suggests her boss making a television program about krishna. aware of krishna's love towards her, priya calls him to join her in singapore to ask about her mother's (kiran juneja) permission to marry her. sonia objects to this, saying that people will want to exploit his abilities. she then explains the events of the previous film. she also tells him that rohit was called to singapore and was hired by a scientist, dr. siddhant arya (naseeruddin shah), to design a computer that could see the future to prevent wars and help prepare against natural disasters. rohit later discovered that the purpose of the computer was not for good, so he destroyed it and was later killed by siddhant. krishna's mother, nisha, also died of trauma, just after giving birth to krishna. krishna promises sonia that he will never reveal his powers, so she permits him to go. in singapore, during the program's production, krishna keeps his word and reveals nothing exceptional about himself; honey and priya are fired again.
krishna meets circus performer kristian li (bin xia), who attempts to raise funds to pay for his young sister's (yu xuan) leg surgery. he invites krishna and priya to his circus, where a fire breaks out during the performance. several children remain trapped in the blaze. to save the children without revealing his abilities, krishna wears a broken black mask lying over there and wears his jacket inside-out, creating the person "krrish". later, when kristian sees krrish fighting some goons and removing his mask, he discovers that his friend krishna is krrish. as krrish is being offered a reward for his deeds, krishna asks kristian to assume the identity, so that he can pay for his sister's surgery.
meanwhile, priya and honey also discover that krishna is the real krrish upon seeing priya's footage from her video camera on tv. they decide to release the footage on tv to make krishna a star. krishna arrives and overhears them talking about how priya had lied to him, and how they will reveal his identity. just before priya confesses to honey that she has genuinely fallen in love with krishna, he leaves, dejected.
after being confronted by krishna at his apartment they talked what she said, priya realises her mistake and stops her boss from revealing krrish's identity. she then meets dr. vikram sinha, (sharat saxena) who has been searching for krishna for years. he tells them that rohit is still alive; after completing the computer, he and rohit tested it by starting it with rohit's retina and heartbeat scan. they saw siddhant holding rohit at gunpoint. rohit understood that siddhant was going to kill him and then use the computer for his own selfish needs. he destroyed it and later, was being taken as a prisoner by siddhant until he starts a new future computer.
in the present, siddhant has rebuilt the computer after 20 years. he starts it to see his future and sees krrish holding him at gunpoint. siddhant then kills kristian, thinking that he is krrish. krishna later follows siddhant to his remote hidden island lair. when siddhant looks into the future again, he sees the same thing and is shocked to see krrish still alive and on his island.
when krishna enters the compound, there is a vicious fight with siddhant's thugs. krishna eventually kills them with his superpowers, but siddhant kills vikram and holds rohit and priya at gunpoint. eventually, krishna saves priya and rohit, and wounds siddhant fatally. before siddhant dies, krishna reveals himself as the real krrish to him and rohit by removing his mask. after siddhant dies, krishna and priya, then save rohit and take him back to india, reuniting him with sonia. rohit then uses his late father's special computer to contact his alien friend jadoo, whose spaceship is later seen coming from a distance. rohit, krishna, priya and sonia thank jadoo and krishna and priya get married.


== cast ==
hrithik roshan as krishna "krrish" mehra / dr. rohit mehra, krishna's father (double role)
priyanka chopra as priya kalyanan
naseeruddin shah as dr. siddhant arya
rekha as sonia mehra, krishna's grandmother and rohit's mother
manini mishra as honey arora
sharat saxena as dr. vikram sinha
archana puran singh as nayantara, priya and honey's boss
bin xia as kristian li / krrish
hemant pandey as bahadur
puneet issar as komal singh
akash khurana as father, krishna's catholic school principal
kiran juneja as amisha kalyanan, priya's mother
yu xuan as kristian's sister
preity zinta as nisha mehra, krishna's mother (special appearance)
rakesh roshan as dr. sanjay mehra, krishna's grandfather and rohit's father (special appearance)


== production ==


=== development ===
in november 2004, the roshans confirmed they would produce a sequel to koi... mil gaya (2003). they announced that actors hrithik roshan and rekha would return for the sequel, but that preity zinta would be replaced by priyanka chopra. chopra also confirmed the same, adding, "the story will start where koi... mil gaya ended." rakesh roshan hoped that the film would be remembered as the first to prove that the indian film industry is equal to hollywood. he decided to push the story forward by focusing on the son of the previous films's protagonist, who would inherit his father's special abilities. the story combined elements of indian mythology (the main character's name krishna alludes to the hindu lord krishna), chinese martial arts and hollywood films to set itself up as a film of global significance.


=== pre-production ===
rakesh roshan wanted krrish to be a trendsetter in indian cinema, with visual effects on par with hollywood films. he hired hollywood special effects experts marc kolbe and craig mumma, who had both previously worked on such films as independence day, godzilla and sky captain, to help create the visual effects for the film. roshan also hired hong kong action director tony ching after admiring his work in hero. before production began, hrithik roshan went to china to train with ching for the cable work that would be needed to make his character "fly". a story board of the film was prepared and sent to ching to help him develop the action sequences. additional production credits include: farah khan  choreographer, samir chanda and sham kaushal  art directors, baylon fonesca and nakul kamte  sound, nahush pise  makeup artist, sham kaushal  assistant action director.


=== filming ===
krrish was the first indian film to be shot in singapore under the singapore tourism board's film-in-singapore subsidy scheme, and over 60% of the film was shot there. shooting was accomplished on location over a span of 2 months, from september to november 2005. locations featured included the singapore zoo, the gateway building, and the singapore national library. another major filming location was robinson road, where heavy rains caused production delays. the singapore police were on location to block roads and protect the filming equipment, such as when the film's action scenes required two 250-foot high industrial cranes. author audrey yue noted that the film shoot benefited singapore by leading to domestic and indian film-induced tourism.filming also took place in manali and film city in mumbai. during filming of a flying stunt, one of the wires that was tied to hrithik roshan broke, causing him to fall 50 feet, though he landed safely on a shop's canopy. hrithik described the incident as a "freak accident", stating, "i was skydiving to my death till i fell on a six-feet-long canopy of a shop that was out because of the slight drizzle. the canopy had iron rods. but i missed those rods too. what do i say? i guess the right word to describe the situation would be jadoo (magic)." roshan also suffered other injuries during the film's production. he tore the hamstring in his right leg during a circus scene, singed his hair while running through fire in another action scene, and broke his thumb and toe during strenuous training for the wirework.


=== post-production ===
indian firm prasad efx assigned a team of more than 100 vfx specialists to work with marc kolbe and craig mumma to create the visual effects for the film. included were sophisticated 3d modelling and computer animation, including whole body scans, 3d replicas of vehicles, fire sequences, complicated wire removals and compositing work. they prepared over 1,200 vfx shots, accounting for approximately 90 minutes of screen time. describing the effects, rakesh roshan stated, "if you liked the visual effects in koi... mil gaya, you will find them far better in krrish. i do not think audiences have seen anything like this in hindi films."


== music ==
the film's soundtrack, composed by rajesh roshan, was released on 30 april 2006 by t-series. lyricists included ibraheem ashk, nasir faraaz, and vijay akela. salim-sulaiman provided the background score. it became the seventh best-selling bollywood soundtrack of the year.
hinditamilcritical reviews of the soundtrack were generally favourable, though some in the media called it a disappointment. joginder tuteja of bollywood hungama gave the album a rating of 3.5 out of 5 stars, saying that it was "another good outing for bollywood music lovers." he especially praised the songs "chori chori", "koi tumsa nahi" and "pyaar ki ek kahaani." sukanya verma of rediff gave a favourable review for the soundtrack's "catchy" songs. however, she felt that while the songs meshed with the film, "none of them bear the staying power of rajesh roshan's earlier soundtracks." shruti bhasin of planet bollywood enjoyed the original songs, giving 7.5 out of 10 stars, but was disappointed with the remixes. dr. mandar v. bichu of gulf news said that it did not live up to the pre-release expectations.


== marketing ==
as a part of the marketing merchandise offered for sale prior to the film's release to maximize profits. these included action figures, masks and other toys.


== release ==


=== theatrical ===
the final budget of krrish came to 40 crore, which at that time was considered a big-budget film by bollywood standards. the film was released on 23 june 2006 with 1,000 prints, and in 5 languages simultaneously. it was the first indian film to receive payments in advance for product placement, music, and international distribution rights.


=== home media ===
the film's dvd was released in region 1 on 18 august 2006, by adlabs. on 21 august 2006, it was released for all regions by filmkraft. adlabs also released a blu-ray version.


== reception ==


=== box office ===
krrish had a good opening week, and tickets were reportedly selling for many times the original cost at some locations. total gross collections were an indian record of 41.6 crore (29.7 crore nett) for its opening week. krrish became the fourth-highest-grossing film of 2006, earning over 69 crore nett in india alone, and was classified as a "blockbuster" by box office india. it also grossed 31.68 crore in the overseas market, where it was declared a "hit". the final worldwide total gross was 126 crore. one week after krrish was released, another superhero film, superman returns was released in india. rakesh roshan stated, "i was a little skeptical that superman might hurt me, but fortunately it didn't." in fact, krrish fared better at the box office in india than superman returns did.


=== critical response ===


==== india ====
krrish received mixed reviews from critics in india. taran adarsh of bollywood hungama believed that the film surpassed expectations, but felt that there were issues with pacing in first hour. overall, he deemed krrish to be "a terrifically exciting and compelling experience", and awarded the film 4 of 5 stars. nikhat kazmi noted in the times of india that while the superhero and action sequences were appealing, there were not enough of them. he was also not excited by the romantic parts, comparing them to a sightseeing tour, first in india and then in singapore. he said that overall, this film lacks the fun of its predecessor. on the other hand, raja sen said that krrish was infinitely better than kmg, though ultimately it was all about hrithik roshan. sen and sukanya verma, writing for rediff, both gave the film 3 out of 5 stars, and both said that it was a good film for children. sen summarised "so, is it a good superhero movie? no, but it's well-intentioned. it's a full-on kiddie movie, and while a lot of us might be scornful of krrish, it's heartening to see fantasy officially entering mainstream bollywood." verma agreed with other critics that it took too long for the action to get started, and said that a lot of attention was spent showing off roshan's muscles. he summarised, "krrish neither has the sleek aura nor the deep-rooted ideology of superheroes. what it does have is a super spirited performance from hrithik roshan, which is likely to appeal to children. and that's worth a three-star cheer." saibal chatterjee wrote in the hindustan times that krrish is a hackneyed, formulaic masala film, with special effects added on top, and hoped that this would not be the future of bollywood. rajeev masand of cnn-ibn condemned the screenplay and thought that the only thing that made the film watchable was the acting of hrithik roshan. he gave the film only 2 out of 5 stars, saying "krrish is only an average film that could have been so much better if the makers had concentrated as hard on its story as they did on its action and stunts."


==== overseas ====
overseas reviews were positive. the rotten tomatoes aggregate rating is 88% "fresh", based on 8 reviews, with an average rating of 7 out of 10. richard james havis of the hollywood reporter stated, "this bollywood epic crunches together romance, comedy, extraterrestrials, martial arts, dancing and action to tell an entertaining story about a reluctant indian superhero" but said it may be "far too crazed for foreign viewers". david chute of la weekly deemed it a "hearty pulp cinema that really sticks to your ribs". likewise, laura kern of the new york times said it was a blend of carefree romance, show-stopping action and sci-fi. ronnie scheib of variety said that it was an "enjoyable, daffily improbable escapist romp". he praised the action sequences as ingeniously choreographed, but very family-friendly. though jaspreet pandohar of bbc was critical of the script for being "low on originality", he praised hrithik roshan's performance and the action scenes. dr. p.v. vaidyanathan, in a review for bbc shropshire, said that the film's excellent special effects were as good as the best from hollywood, praised hrithik's acting, but called the music mundane.


=== accolades ===
krrish was one of india's possible nominations for the 2007 academy award for best foreign film, but the country ultimately chose rang de basanti as its pick. despite this, krrish won numerous awards, including 3 filmfare awardsbest special effects, best action and best background scoreand was nominated for best film, best director, best actor, best supporting actress and best villain at the 52nd filmfare awards. at the 2007 iifa awards, krrish won best actor, best action, and best special effects. rakesh roshan won the creative person of the year title at the same ceremony. additionally, the film was nominated in the following categories at the ceremony: best director, best music and best story.hrithik roshan won other acting awards that year, including the star screen award best actor, zee cine award for best actor  male, bfja  best actor award (hindi) and gifa best actor. the film's special effects won the national film award for best special effects. the film also took best picture honours at the matri shree media awards.in a showing of the film's popularity with children, krrish swept the major film categories at the pogo amazing kids awards, which are voted on by children across india. winners were: hrithik roshan (most amazing actor  male), priyanka chopra (most amazing actor  female), krrish (most amazing film), special effects in krrish (most amazing moment in a film).


== sequel ==

after the success of krrish, rakesh roshan announced that he would be making a sequel, tentatively titled krrish 3. he confirmed that hrithik roshan and priyanka chopra would reprise their roles, and that the antagonists would be played by vivek oberoi and kangana ranaut.


== see also ==
science fiction films in india


== references ==


== further reading ==


== external links ==
official website
krrish at rotten tomatoes
krrish at box office mojo
krrish at imdb
krrish at bollywood hungama