kshanam (transl.moment) is a 2016 indian telugu-language mystery thriller film directed by ravikanth perepu. the film features adivi sesh and adah sharma in lead roles and anasuya bharadwaj, vennela kishore, satyam rajesh, satyadev kancharana, and ravi varma in supporting roles with the music is by sricharan pakala and cinematography by shaneil deo. 
released on 26 february 2016, the film opened to positive reviews from critics. the film was remade in tamil as sathya (2017), in hindi as baaghi 2 (2018), and in kannada as aadyaa (2020).


== plot ==
rishi, a san francisco-based investment banker, gets a voice call from his ex-girlfriend shweta. they studied medicine in the same college and wanted to marry, but her father arranged an alliance with an entrepreneur named karthik. in the present, rishi, who still loves swetha, leaves for india on the pretense of attending a relative's marriage. he hires a car from babu khan, a travel agent, takes a sim card on his sister's address and stays at hotel marriott.
rishi meets shweta at a restaurant and learns her five-year-old daughter ria is missing. she laments that no one else, including karthik, believes that ria actually exists. rishi also learns about karthik's brother bobby, a drug addict who regularly visits her home. rishi begins an informal investigation which fails many times, also inviting the ire of two african-american gangsters in the city. babu, who helps them in transporting drugs, saves rishi on humanitarian grounds. posing as vasanth khanna, a police officer, rishi meets karthik and learns that the couple was childless. karthik recalls shweta being attacked by two masked men before a school to steal her car. he added that shweta went into a coma and post-recovery started claiming that she had a five-year-old daughter named ria.
perplexed, rishi later watches a closed-circuit television video footage of the masked men attacking shweta on the day when ria went missing. unfortunately, ria is seen nowhere in the footage, which makes rishi doubt shweta's mental condition. he confronts shweta, who refuses to acknowledge that ria is imaginary. rishi sees height markings of a child on a wall, and before he could react, shweta commits suicide in his presence. acp jaya and inspector ravi chowdary investigate the suicide case. khanna is killed in marriott, and babu confesses to rishi that he saw bobby kidnapping ria. they meet jaya and chowdary and get bobby arrested. in custody, bobby is killed by jaya in an act of self-defense.
that same night, khanna's murderers attack babu and rishi, and babu is killed in the process of shooting the murderers to death. rishi watches a mms in the murderers' phone sent by jaya instructing to kill him. rishi meets jaya at her farmhouse, where ria is hidden. jaya reveals that karthik wanted to kill ria and arranged the attack on shwetha, after which jaya found ria in bobby's custody. after meeting ria, jaya conspires to raise the girl as her daughter because she had lost her own husband and unborn daughter in a car accident. jaya wanted to name her daughter ria, so when she saw shwetha's daughter, she convinced herself that her daughter has come back. thus, jaya made a deal with karthik; karthik wanted shweta to suffer so according to jaya's plan, he convinced his friends and family to pretend that ria never existed, saying shweta cannot bear the shock of her daughter's death.
before jaya can kill rishi, chowdary shoots her after listening to the conversation on his way to the farmhouse with his subordinates. karthik is arrested and reveals that ria is not his daughter, as a medical report confirmed him sterile in the past. then, rishi remembers his last meeting with shweta; she visited him to invite him to her wedding, and they made love. rishi now realises ria is his biological child. as he approaches ria, he sees a reflection of shweta smiling at him.


== cast ==


== production ==
the film's concept was inspired by a small incident in actor and filmmaker adivi sesh's life when he felt scared for a four-year-old girl and her friends at a school in jubilee hills, hyderabad. sesh wanted to make a thriller film with the missing of a three-year-old being the backdrop. prasad v potluri of pvp cinema agreed to bankroll the film and sesh's friend ravikanth perepu was chosen to direct the film; it marked the latter's debut in telugu cinema. sesh and perepu worked on the screenplay for ten months. pre-production phase began three months after the scripting work commenced. sesh and perepu chose to work with a low budget to make the project a feasible one, considering the genre's appeal. the film's crew consisted of 20 members; two of perepu's twelfth grade friends were the associate directors.while writing the script, sesh and perepu discussed possibilities for every situation and discarded the first one as it would be a predictable one. shaneil deo was the film's director of photography. sricharan pakala composed the film's soundtrack and score. perepu edited the film with arjun shastri; sesh and the associate directors did involve in the process. sesh played rishi, an investment banker who searches for his ex-girlfriend's missing child on her request. he stated that rishi was modelled on his real self in terms of sensibilities except for the fact that the character is an alcoholic.


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by sricharan pakala and released by junglee music. the background score of the film was much appreciated with the songs "cheliya" and "ee kshanam" topping the charts.


== release and reception ==
kshanam was released on 26 february 2016 across telangana and andhra pradesh and received critical acclaim and received positive response from the first show. the hindu gave it 4 stars.


== box office ==
in 10 days since its release, kshanam grossed about  4.8 crores at the telugu (ap and telangana) box office. it collected $65,679 ( 44.83 lakh) from 27 screens at the us box office in the first weekend. in its second weekend, it collected $28,889 from 20 screens at the us box office and its 10-day total us collection stands at $111,037 ( 74.68 lakh).


== remakes ==
the film was remade in tamil as sathya (2017) directed by pradeep krishnamoorty, in hindi as baaghi 2 directed by ahmed khan and starring tiger shroff and disha patani, and in kannada as aadyaa directed by k. m. chaitanya.


== accolades ==


== see also ==
bunny lake is missing (1965)


== references ==


== external links ==
kshanam at imdb