kuch khatti kuch meethi (transl.a little sour, a little sweet) is a 2001 indian film directed by rahul rawail and starring kajol in a double role as two estranged identical twins. the storyline follows the general theme of its 1961 hollywood counterpart the parent trap, which is based on the 1949 novel lottie and lisa, but with the added melodrama and slight-changed storyline of a bollywood movie. the film also stars sunil shetty, rishi kapoor, rati agnihotri and  pooja batra. this is the second time that kajol played a dual role after dushman. the rights to this film are owned by shah rukh khan's red chillies entertainment.


== plot ==
raj khanna (rishi kapoor) is a wealthy and eligible businessman who is married to archana (rati agnihotri). since rajs evil step sister devyani (mita vashishth) wants his wealth, she informs raj that his wife is having an affair with another person. they both decide to separate. shortly before separating she gives birth to twins, one of which is taken away from her and given to raj. sweety (kajol) grows up with her father. on the other hand archana shifts to london with the other twin named tina (kajol). sweety refuses to marry the man of her fathers choice and runs away to london. the twins meet through a series of coincidences and decides to switch places. both the twin sisters decide to reunite their family again. when tina meets raj she finds out that he is having an affair with savitri (pooja batra). tinas boyfriend samir (sunil shetty) also helps both the twins to unite their parents. in the end raj and archana finally meet and they consider living together again.


== cast ==
kajol as tina mother and twins daughter sweety anjali khanna - raj and archana's twin daughters
rishi kapoor as raj khanna
sunil shetty as sameer
rati agnihotri as archana khanna
mita vasisht as devyani anjali reborn , raj's stepsister
razzak khan as baloo
pooja batra as savitri
pramod moutho as doctor, devyani's lover
dinesh hingoo as sweety anjali's prospective father-in-law
parmeet sethi as uncle ranjit


== production and reception ==
aishwarya rai bachchan was considered for the role of tina/sweety. rati agnihotri returned to acting with this film after a 16-year break for marriage and motherhood. suman tarafdar of filmfare rated the film two stars and gave a critical review of both the film and kajol's performance. according to critic arati koppar (also writing for the same publication), the film's ending was borrowed from "some low-budget" telugu-language films.


== tracks list ==
the film soundtrack contains 8 songs composed by anu malik and penned by sameer.

"ab nahi to kab": anu malik & sunidhi chauhan
"band kamre mein": anuradha sriram
"khud bhi nachungi": alka yagnik
"kuch kuch khatti": alka yagnik
"neend udh rahi hai": alka yagnik & kumar sanu
"saamne baith kar": alka yagnik & kumar sanu
"tumko sirf tumko i": kumar sanu& alka yagnik
"tumko sirf tumko ii": kumar sanu


== references ==


== external links ==
kuch khatti kuch meethi at imdb