kunwara (bachelor) is a 2000 indian hindi comedy film directed by david dhawan, with cinematography by chota k. naidu, and was released on 14 july 2000. this film opened with negative reviews from critics, but the craze of govinda's films carried positive word of mouth and the film became successful at the box office. the film stars govinda, urmila matondkar, nagma, om puri, kader khan and johnny lever in lead roles. the film is a remake of the telugu film bavagaru bagunnara?, which itself was based on the movie a walk in the clouds.


== plot ==
raju (govinda) and urmila (urmila matondkar) meet in new zealand and fall in love. they plan to meet again very soon in india. on the way, raju meets a woman named sharmila (nagma), a heartbroken, suicidal pregnant woman who tells raju of her cruel boyfriend. in order to save her respect, raju decides to play her husband role and they return together sharmila's home, where he meets her family. however, soon enough, raju finds out that urmila is none other than sharmila's sister.


== cast ==
govinda as raju
urmila matondkar as urmila
nagma as sharmila singh
kader khan as vishwanath pratap singh (balraj's father)
om puri as balraj singh (sharmila's father)
shammi as mrs. vishwanath pratap singh
johnny lever as gopal (raju's friend)
smita jaykar as balraj's wife
mohan joshi as inder's dad
raza murad as  prithvi thakur (ajay's dad)
inder kumar as ajay
aasif sheikh as inder
gavin packard as henchman  of prithvi thakur
jeetu verma as henchman  of prithvi thakur


== reception and awards ==
kunwara received mostly negative reviews from critics, although some of the performances were received well. sukanya verma from rediff.com wrote, "don't ask any questions. don't look for any kind of logic. go with the flow. otherwise, you're not ready for this david dhawan-govinda flick." taran adarsh of bollywood hungama criticised the film, concluding, "kunwara has the super-successful david dhawan-govinda combination as its strong point, but the film pales in comparison to the hits the two have delivered earlier. the film may start off well, but it lacks a good script to sustain after the initial curiosity subsides."kunwara was nominated for two awards in the same category at the annual filmfare awards:

filmfare award for best performance in a comic role - govinda
filmfare award for best performance in a comic role - johnny lever


== music ==
the soundtrack of the film contains 8 songs. the music is composed by aadesh shrivastava, with lyrics authored by sameer. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 13,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's fourteenth highest-selling.


== references ==


== external links ==
kunwara at imdb