kuruthipunal (transl.river of blood) is a 1995 indian tamil-language action thriller film directed and filmed by p. c. sreeram. co-produced and written by kamal haasan, the film stars him, arjun, nassar, gautami and geetha. it revolves around two police officers seeking to curb a terrorist group. the movie is a remake of 1994 hindi movie drohkaal.kuruthipunal was simultaneously shot in telugu as drohi (transl.traitor). the film was co-produced by haasan's brother chandrahasan. the score was composed by mahesh, and editing was handled by n. p. sathish. it was the first indian film to use dolby stereo surround sr technology.
kuruthipunal was released on 23 october 1995, and received critical acclaim. it won the cinema express award for best film  tamil, while kamal haasan won the filmfare award for best actor  tamil. the film was india's official entry for the 68th academy awards under the category best foreign language film, but was not nominated.


== plot ==
police officers adhi narayanan and abbas devise a masterful plan to bring a terrorist group in control, and send two secret vigilance officers  anand and shiva  on "operation dhanush". the objective is to infiltrate a terrorist group headed by a naxalite named badri, and relay information back to abbas. after a year while relaying information to abbas, anand gets caught, but he commits suicide before the terrorists can interrogate him. with information relayed by anand, abbas and adhi know that the terrorists are picking up someone important and going to trichy.
abbas tightens the security at the railway station, while adhi goes to call his wife from a public phone booth. adhi sees some suspicious activity and tries to get a closer look, but the sound from his radio alerts the terrorist, a shootout follows where adhi manages to hurt a terrorist, while another tries to flee in a car but is caught as adhi shoots at the car's tyre. the wounded terrorist gets into the railway station, but gets shot down by abbas and the car driver is taken into custody.
adhi asks the driver for information on the terrorist head badri, but the driver maintains his innocence. adhi, convinced that the driver holds a mid-level position in the terrorist camp, refuses to believe him. the terrorists plan to assassinate a central minister who is visiting the city. an rpg expert is brought in to shoot down the minister, the terrorists seem to know the route which the minister will take and successfully kills the minister despite some hurdles, but the rpg shooter is caught by adhi. the shooter identifies the car driver as badri.
adhi lets badri know that the rpg shooter has spilt the beans and is willing to give more information about the other members of the terrorist organisation. badri uses his influence and kills the rpg shooter in jail. an enraged adhi hits badri and decides to kill badri but then has a change of heart and interrogates him instead. badri reveals that their spy in the police department is srinivasan  abbas and adhi's mentor. adhi tells the cbi about srinivasan being a spy, but srinivasan commits suicide before he is arrested by the cbi.
badri's right-hand man narasimhan sends terrorists to kill adhi's pet and shoots adhi's son to show adhi that he can kill adhi's family just as easily. narasimhan threatens to kill adhi's family if badri is not allowed to escape. adhi cooperates to let badri escape. adhi acts as the new spy for the terrorist group. abbas gets a little suspicious and follows adhi when he goes to meet badri. abbas is caught, tortured and killed by badri.
overcome with sadness, abbas's wife zeenath and their teenage daughter come to live with adhi, his wife, sumitra and their son. badri again threatens adhi to let a couple of terrorists, surendar and mala, to come and live with him to keep a closer eye on adhi. overcome with guilt and grief over abbas's death and his betrayal of his duty, he realises that he is travelling down the same path srinivasan had done and decides to end the arrangement. adhi sets up a meeting with badri. shiva still in contact with adhi tells him that narasimhan is meeting his wife and if narasimhan dies he will become badri's right-hand man, so adhi goes and kills narasimhan.
adhi then tries to attack badri in the safe house, but he is overpowered. meanwhile, surendar staying at adhi's house tries to rape abbas's teenage daughter and kills mala when she intervenes. sumitra intervenes and seduces surendar. while he gets a bit too excited, she gets the gun from him and manages to kill him.
adhi is then tortured for information about dhanush. when only adhi, badri and badri's second in command, shiva is left in the room, badri reveals to adhi that the group has even found the radio used by the spy and that dhanush (the codename of the spy) can no longer contact the police. this surprises adhi and he looks at shiva, who is the spy, for confirmation. badri notices this and realises that shiva is dhanush. when badri tries to kill shiva, adhi breaks free and wrestles with badri and adhi kills badri.
adhi, who believes that the mission to bring down all the terrorist organisations is more important than his life, orders shiva to shoot him so that shiva could continue to be the spy. shiva shoots and kills adhi just as the other terrorist members enter the room hearing the commotion inside. shiva convinces the others that badri was killed by adhi and he killed adhi. he proclaims that as badri is dead, he, the second in command, will take over the reins of the group. adhi and abbas are posthumously felicitated.


== cast ==
kamal haasan as adhi narayanan
arjun as abbas
nassar as badri
gouthami as sumitra
geetha as zeenath
nizhalgal ravi as a criminal killed by abbas
k. viswanath as srinivasan
ajay rathnam as the rpg shooter
subhalekha sudhakar as soori
sab john as narasimham
arvind krishna as shiva / dhanush
anusha as mala


== production ==


=== development ===
when p. c. sreeram and kamal haasan were in bombay in 1994, govind nihalani invited them for a screening of his hindi film drohkaal. both men liked the film; haasan wanted to remake it in tamil, and sreeram agreed. after haasan and sreeram had discussions with sab john on "how to go about the shoot", it was decided that haasan write the screenplay of the remake. after completing the script, haasan suggested three titles, two of which were kuruthipunal and drohi. the former title, which translates to "river of blood", was met with objection as it was believed "the audience may not have a stomach for a morbid title". however, sreeram preferred it as it was also the title of a novel by indira parthasarathy, and he felt it had a connection to akira kurosawa's throne of blood (1957). it was decided to shoot the film simultaneously in telugu, with drohi as the title. the film was produced by haasan and his brother chandrahasan under the banner raaj kamal films international, photographed by sreeram and edited by n. p. sathish. it had no songs, and the score was composed by mahesh.


=== casting and filming ===
haasan, besides producing the film and writing the screenplay, also portrayed the lead character adhi narayanan. he approached arjun to portray deutragonist abbas, and arjun agreed to do the film even without hearing the narration. nassar, who portrayed the role of naxalite commander badri, revealed that he had the freedom to interpret the character in his own way and also said he "didn't really act in the film. the context of every scene was so well established, that i did nothing more than maintain a stoic expression in most scenes. the fact that my character was torturing someone and yet my face was so calm contributed to the impact." vikram dubbed the voice of sab john, who portrayed the naxalite narasimham, and rohini dubbed the voice of gautami, who portrayed adhi's wife sumitra. this was the fourth and final collaboration between haasan and gautami, until the release of papanasam (2015).kuruthipunal was the first indian film to use dolby stereo surround sr technology. while composing the score for badri, mahesh decided to make it sound ominous, and he "wanted the omen of death to reflect" on the character's face. sreeram recalled, "i am not a cinematographer but someone who is part of the expedition group [...] there were lots that were planned ahead of the shoot, which made it easier for us". while filming the scene where adhi interrogates badri, sreeram took liberties with how interrogations in real life take place; he did not want the scene to look mundane, but was "opting for that visual style for the first time [...] it also came from a point of commercial interest". despite the tight schedule and budget for the film, shooting was completed within 30 days. according to sreeram, "the shooting was akin to a war footing. you cannot shoot three or four scenes a day, if not for a great star cast".


== release and reception ==
kuruthipunal was released on 23 october 1995, and received critical acclaim. the film was featured as part of a retrospective to kamal haasan under the category "director in focus" at the international film festival rotterdam. on 11 november 1995, k. vijiyan from new straits times praised the film's special effects for their realism, but added "the fear kamal feels for his family was not properly brought to the screen by sreeram. the intensity arjun usually puts into his movies was also missing here", and concluded that kuruthipunal was "like an american action movie made in tamil". on 19 november, ananda vikatan said the film was attempting to turn tamil cinema, which was moving fast in the direction of masala entertainers, by bringing in a different screenplay. the reviewer noted that though it would not fulfill the needs of ordinary people, it was a wonderful film, and rated it 45 out of 100. nihalani called the film better than drohkaal.


== accolades ==
kuruthipunal won the cinema express award for best film  tamil, while kamal haasan won the filmfare award for best actor  tamil. the film was india's official entry for the 68th academy awards under the category best foreign language film, but was not nominated.


== legacy ==
kuruthipunal has been recognised by many to have set benchmarks for other action films in the period. many filmmakers including gautham menon and ar murugadoss have cited it as an influence on their works. certain dialogues from the film attained popularity such as "thairiyamna enna theriyuma, payam illatha mathiri nadikkarathuthan" (do you know what bravery is? it is to act as if you know no fear), "delay, disable and disintegrate" and "shoot me shoot me, my man. it's a bloody order!".


== see also ==
list of submissions to the 68th academy awards for best foreign language film


== notes ==


== references ==


== bibliography ==
dhananjayan, g. (2011). the best of tamil cinema, 1931 to 2010: 19311976. galatta media.
rajadhyaksha, ashish; willemen, paul, eds. (1998) [1994]. encyclopaedia of indian cinema (pdf). oxford university press. isbn 0-19-563579-5.


== external links ==
kuruthipunal at imdb