kushi (transl. happiness) is a 2000 indian tamil-language romantic comedy film written and directed by s. j. surya and produced by a. m. rathnam. the film featured vijay and jyothika in the leading roles, while mumtaj, vivek and vijayakumar play other supporting roles. the film had cinematography by jeeva, while music was composed by deva. the film was released in may 2000 and spawned several remakes. the film was simultaneously made in telugu as kushi but released one year later, and later remade in hindi as khushi, and in kannada as eno onthara. jyothika went on to win the filmfare best actress award in tamil for her performance in the film.


== plot ==
the movie begins with the birth of the protagonists, shiva and jennifer "jenny" aka selvi, in calcutta and tirunelveli district of tamil nadu respectively. during the course of their childhood, they encounter each other a couple a times, though both don't know each other. when shiva turns twenty one, he decides to pursue his higher studies in canada, much to the disappointment of his mother, who is worried about him and wants him to stay in calcutta. but while on the way to the airport, he meets with an accident and fractures his leg, forcing him to give up his dreams of studying abroad. at the same time, jenny wants to pursue her post-graduation, but this is opposed by her father pandiyan, who wants her to get married. but when jenny's marriage gets cancelled as the groom runs away on the night before the wedding to elope with his lover, pandiyan agrees to jenny pursuing higher studies, on the condition that she gets married once she completes her education.
shiva and jenny both enrol in madras christian college, but in different classes. they meet each other at a temple and soon become close friends. shiva's friend babu is in love with jenny's friend shanthi. they both work together to unite their friends. but one day, jenny catches shiva staring at her waist while she is studying. a heated argument ensues, following which both shiva and jenny end their friendship.
shiva and jenny try to avoid each other, but can't as shanthi's father ambareesh, a powerful and influential industrialist and politician, has found out about his daughter's relationship with babu, and goes to great lengths to avoid the couple from meeting each other. shiva and jenny are forced to work together to help babu and shanthi meet each other, despite ambareesh's opposition. when shiva is caught trying to sneak babu into shanthi's house, ambareesh sends his men to attack shiva. when one of the men attempt to stab shiva, jenny attempts to save shiva, but in the process she cuts her hand and loses consciousness due to heavy bleeding. shiva gets jenny admitted in hospital, where she soon recovers. it is at this stage that both shiva and jenny realise they are in love with each other, but refuse to admit it. shiva pretends to accept the sexual overtures of the college bombshell anita, just to make jenny jealous.
meanwhile, ambareesh tries to get shanthi forcibly married to someone else. shiva finds out and sneaks shanthi out of the wedding hall, thus stopping the wedding. shanthi and babu get married at a register office with the support of shiva and jenny. before leaving for their honeymoon, babu and shanthi advise them to sort out their relationship. when both shiva and jenny complete their post-graduation and leave for their respective hometowns, they attempt to contact each other by phone to declare their love, but fail. shiva rushes to the chennai egmore railway station (where jenny is to board a train to tirunelveli), while at the same time, jenny goes to the chennai central railway station (where shiva is to board a train to calcutta). they miss each other, but they write a letter declaring their love for each other and hand it over to their co-passengers on the train which they are respectively going to board. jenny reaches her village the following morning in a sad mood, but soon is in for a surprise; she is to marry none other than shiva that day. shiva had read jenny's letter and then informed pandiyan about their relationship, who agreed to get them married. the movie ends with shiva and jenny happily hugging and kissing each other.


== cast ==


== production ==
after watching the premiere show of vaali, rathnam offered s. j. surya an opportunity to direct his next venture with vijay and jyothika being signed on soon after. jyothika was cast as the lead heroine after s. j. surya's  vaali. actress aswathi menon was also considered for a leading role, but she opted to continue with her education. vijay began shooting for the film during the same time he was shooting fazil's kannukkul nilavu and revealed how hard it had been to shift between the two characters he was portraying.early reports indicated that the film would portray an illicit relationship where a young widowed mother (mumtaj) would lust for the lover (vijay) of her own daughter (jyothika). the producer rubbished the rumors claiming that the film would be a romantic comedy.the producers initially readied themselves to release the film on april 14, 2000 but pushed dates back to accommodate the release of bigger budget ventures such as mani ratnam's alaipayuthey and rajiv menon's kandukondain kandukondain. the film eventually released on 19 may 2000.


== release ==
rediff.com felt that "overall, the light, airy romance of kushi works just right for the holiday season, with an appeal calculated for the teen and family audiences", praising the director's story-telling. entertainment portal bizhat.com gave the film a below average review and claimed that the film "does not justify the title in any way nor does it come anywhere near his first" and that it "is interesting in the beginning, but monotonous after a time as the narration gets stuck in a groove".the hindu featured the film as runner-up in their list of top tamil films in 2000, placing it behind vikraman's vanathai pola. jyothika went on to win the filmfare best actress award in tamil for her performance in the film. deva won the tamil nadu state film award for best music director in 2000 for his work in the film along with his work in uyirile kalanthathu and sandhitha velai.in 2001, a. m. rathnam re-signed surya to direct the telugu version of the film, also titled kushi. the film starring pawan kalyan and bhumika chawla also similarly won positive reviews and commercial success. surya also directed the hindi version of the film in 2003 as khushi for producer boney kapoor, with fardeen khan and kareena kapoor in the lead roles. the success of the lead pair's chemistry prompted vijay and jyothika to team up again in 2003 for thirumalai, while the director and actor briefly reunited for a project titled puli in 2005, before vijay opted out. in an interview prior to the release of anbe aaruyire (2005), surya revealed that the film was "like a sequel to kushi".


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the film was composed by deva, while vairamuthu penned the lyrics for the songs. "mottu ondru" was based on "why you wanna trip on me" by michael jackson, and "oh vennila" is based on the portuguese song "cano do mar" sung by dulce pontes for primal fear (1996).


== references ==


== external links ==
kushi at imdb