kya kehna (english: what to say) is a 2000 indian hindi romantic drama film. written by honey irani, it was directed by kundan shah and released on 19 may 2000 at a budget of 5.3 crore (us$740,000). kya kehna dealt with the taboo issue of pre-marital pregnancy and society views, and stars preity zinta as a single teenage mother with saif ali khan, chandrachur singh, farida jalal and anupam kher. this is the first of several films where khan and zinta acted together.
kya kehna was filmed back in 1997 and was supposed to release in 1998. in fact, this film was supposed to be zinta's debut film and she even began shooting for it, but due to some unknown reasons and delays, it was postponed to 2000. therefore, several of her films were released before this film, including two of her telugu films. upon its theatrical release, it was positively reviewed by critics. zinta's performance and irani's story writing was highlighted. the music was composed by rajesh roshan. kya kehna was an unexpected success earning 21.8 crore (us$3.1 million) worldwide. at filmfare awards, irani won the best story category and zinta was nominated for best actress.


== plot ==
priya bakshi (preity zinta) is the bubbly, free-spirited daughter of gulshan (anupam kher) and rohini bakshi (farida jalal). priya's parents, brothers, and best friend, ajay (chandrachur singh) love and support her. ajay is secretly in love with priya and wishes to marry her in the future.
priya enters her first year of university and quickly catches the eye of wealthy playboy rahul (saif ali khan), who becomes attracted to her. she succumbs to his charm but ajay and her brother vicky are unsure about rahul. his reputation and womanizing ways worry them, and they warn her to stay away from him. however, priya believes that rahul is in love with her, and the two begin a relationship and have sex. priya convinces her parents to meet rahul, but when they prematurely talk about marriage and the future, he mocks them and leaves priya. priya is heartbroken but tries to move on with her life. she later learns that she is pregnant with rahul's child. her parents go back to rahul to talk about marriage once again. he acknowledges that he is the father but still does not want to marry priya. rahul's mother also berates priya's family, believing that they are looking for financial compensation. priya is faced with a decision, and she chooses to keep the child. her decision prompts her father to willfully banish her from the house due to the shame. alone and neglected, priya is devastated. however, her family later finds it hard to live without her and they bring her back, supporting her during her pregnancy.
priya goes back to university, where she is shunned due to her pregnancy and 'spoiled' character. rahul's mother, who is part of the university's board of directors, tries to convince the other parents that priya should be expelled due to her character. ostracised by friends, neighbours, and society, priya realises ajay's love and dedication for her.
the university holds a year-end performance, where a group of students put on a play that mocks and vilifies priya and her pregnancy. after the play, priya makes a passionate speech about love, honour, and respect. her words move many in the audience, including rahul. her friends apologise to her, and she gains the support of the community. later, ajay declares his love for priya and desires to marry her. however, priya worries whether ajay will accept her and her unborn child. ajay tells her he is fully willing to accept both her and her child as his own. unknown to priya and ajay a remorseful rahul approaches priya's family and reveals he is ready to apologise and raise his and priya's child together to which they agree. priya water breaks before she can answer ajay's proposal and she goes to the hospital to give birth, where she's joined by rahul and her family.
at an event to celebrate the birth of priya's baby, rahul proposes to priya, stating that he is ready for marriage and to raise their child. ajay wishes them well and begins to walk away. however, priya rejects rahul and confesses her love for ajay, asking him whether he's still willing to accept her and her child, ajay agrees to this. rahul accepts priya's decision, wishes them well, and leaves.


== cast ==
preity zinta as priya bakshi
saif ali khan repliced before surgery sidharth malhotra as rahul
chandrachur singh as ajay
anupam kher as gulshan bakshi
farida jalal as rohini bakshi
puneet vashist as priya's brother
nivedita bhattacharya as priya's sister-in-law
mamik singh as priya's brother
amit mistry as priya's brother
navneet nishan as tara seth (rahul's mother)
rajeev verma as rahul's father
deven verma as rustom
rohitash gaud as college student participating in drama (guest role)


== music ==
the soundtrack of the film contains 8 songs. the music is given by rajesh roshan, with lyrics by majrooh sultanpuri. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 20,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's seventh highest-selling. the title song "kya kehna" is lifted from neil sedaka's single "oh carol".


== reception ==


=== box office ===
the film was a box office success and emerged as one of the highest-grossing bollywood films of 2000, and was declared a "super hit" in india. the film's success was unexpected, and it was therefore described as a sleeper hit.


=== critical reception ===
vinayak chakravorty of hindustan times gave the film 3 out of 5 stars, writing, "the basic premise of kya kehna!, then, definitely had the potential of being a gripping family entertainer. unfortunately, somewhere down the line, you feel as if most people associated with the film somehow lost interest." he noted, however, preity zinta as "the bright spot of the film". aradhika sekhon of the tribune wrote, "the movie itself has several flaws but the issues that it tackles are real. the director takes a straight, hard look at the problems of today and holds them up for exhibition. the indian tendency is to sweep uncomfortable issues under the carpet but if films like kya kehna continue to be made, at least, we'll be forced to confront them." mimmy jain of the indian express, in a positive review, commended shah for making "a sensitive film, on a sensitive subject", calling kya kehna "a film that should have been made years ago". she further noted zinta as being "dazzlingly good" in her part.filmfare, in a three-star review, wrote that the film is "worth a watch" and attributed its success to zinta's "very convincing performance". sharmila taliculam from rediff.com was critical of the film, concluding, "apart from the climax, the film is no big deal." namita nivas of screen shared similar sentiments, writing that "there is nothing unusual or different about kya kehna as the makers have been claiming for a long time", but she, too, praised zinta for her "brilliant performance".


== awards ==
filmfare best story award - honey irani
iifa award for technical excellence - best screenplay - honey irani
sansui best actress award - preity zinta


== references ==


== external links ==
kya kehna at imdb