kya yehi pyar hai (english: is this what love is?) (   ?) is a 2002 indian romantic film directed by k. murali mohan rao, starring jackie shroff, aftab shivdasani and amisha patel in lead roles, with cinematography by chota k. naidu. it is a remake of the 1997 tamil film, love today. the film was a hit at the box office.


== plot ==
rahul tiwari (aftab shivdasani) is in love with sandhya patil (amisha patel)  and has been for the last four years without having the courage to tell her. he follows her everywhere, even waiting to board the public bus until she has. sandhya is not even aware of rahul, let alone his affection for her. one day rahul finds out where sandhya lives along with the fact that her father is police inspector raj patil "raja" (ashish vidyarthi), a cruel, sadistic, drunk, and abusive man whose wife rachna (neena kulkarni) and daughter live in fear, even in his absence. raj patil has no respect for any human being regardless of them being his superiors, his subordinates, or even members of the public whom he has sworn to protect. when raj finds out that rahul is trying to enter the life of his daughter, he arrests him publicly, beats him up, and locks him in a cell in his police station.
rahul's brother, dr. kamlakar tiwari (jackie shroff), arranges to get him out of jail with the help of raj's friends. kamlakar hopes that this situation will have taught rahul a lesson. however, it is of no avail as rahul continues obsessing over sandhya regardless of her indifference. in fact, sandhya has even clearly told him and his college friend, neha (anupama verma), that she is only interested in pursuing her education and not interested in rahul at all. fearing rahul's next move, raj tells his wife and daughter that they are to leave the city immediately and move to hyderabad where his older sister resides, only to change his mind on the bus. not being aware of this change of plan, rahul heads to hyderabad to seek sandhya. during his absence, kamlakar dies in an auto accident due to being distracted worrying about his younger brother's future. rahul eventually rushes home upon finding out about his older brother's death, only to see that he has just missed kamlakar's cremation. distraught, rahul soon realizes that he has sacrificed four years of his life as well as his brother for an insensitive girl. when sandhya eventually realizes and confesses her love to rahul, he rejects her and goes on to fulfill his brother's dream by building a future for himself.


== cast ==
aftab shivdasani as rahul tiwari
amisha patel as sandhya patil
jackie shroff as kamlakar tiwari
ashish vidyarthi as raj patil 'raja'
neena kulkarni as rachna
anupama verma as neha
vrajesh hirjee as sundar
sarfaraz khan as peter


== soundtrack ==
all music composer by sajidwajid and lyrics by jalees sherwani.


== references ==


== external links ==
kya yehi pyaar hai at imdb