simn jos antonio de la santsima trinidad bolvar y ponte palacios y blanco (24 july 1783  17 december 1830) (spanish: [simom bolia] (listen), english:  bol-iv-r, -ar also us:  boh-liv-ar), also colloquially as el libertador, was a venezuelan military and political leader who led what are currently the countries of venezuela, bolivia, colombia, ecuador, peru, and panama to independence from the spanish empire.
bolvar was born in caracas (venezuela) into a wealthy family and as was common for the heirs of upper-class families in his day, was sent to be educated abroad at a young age, arriving in spain when he was 16 and later moving to france. while in europe he was introduced to the ideas of the enlightenment, which later motivated him to overthrow the reigning spanish in colonial south america. taking advantage of the disorder in spain prompted by the peninsular war, bolvar began his campaign for independence in 1808. the campaign for the independence of new granada was consolidated with the victory at the battle of boyac on 7 august 1819. he established an organized national congress within three years. despite a number of hindrances, including the arrival of an unprecedentedly large spanish expeditionary force, the revolutionaries eventually prevailed, culminating in the victory at the battle of carabobo in 1821, which effectively made venezuela an independent country.
following this triumph over the spanish monarchy, bolvar participated in the foundation of the first union of independent nations in latin america, gran colombia, of which he was president from 1819 to 1830. through further military campaigns, he ousted spanish rulers from ecuador, peru, and bolivia, the last of which was named after him. he was simultaneously president of gran colombia (present-day venezuela, colombia, panama and ecuador), peru, and bolivia, but soon after, his second-in-command, antonio jos de sucre, was appointed president of bolivia. bolvar aimed at a strong and united spanish america able to cope not only with the threats emanating from spain and the european holy alliance but also with the emerging power of the united states. at the peak of his power, bolvar ruled over a vast territory from the argentine border to the caribbean sea.
bolvar is viewed as a national icon in much of modern south america, and is considered one of the great heroes of the hispanic independence movements of the early 19th century, along with jos de san martn, francisco de miranda and others. towards the end of his life, bolvar despaired of the situation in his native region, with the famous quote "all who served the revolution have plowed the sea". in an address to the constituent congress of the republic of colombia, bolvar stated "fellow citizens! i blush to say this: independence is the only benefit we have acquired, to the detriment of all the rest."


== family history ==


=== origin of bolvar surname ===

the surname bolvar originated with aristocrats from la puebla de bolvar, a small village in the basque country of spain. bolvar's father came from the female line of the ardanza family. his maternal grandmother was descended from families from the canary islands.


=== 16th century ===
the bolvars settled in venezuela in the 16th century. bolvar's first south american ancestor was simn de bolvar (or simon de bolibar; the spelling was not standardized until the 19th century), who lived and worked from 1559 to 1560 in santo domingo (present-day dominican republic) where his son simn de bolvar y castro was born. when the governor was reassigned to venezuela by the spanish crown in 1569, simn de bolvar went with him. as an early settler in spain's venezuela province he became prominent in the local society, and he and his descendants were granted estates, encomiendas, and positions in the local cabildo.when caracas cathedral was built in 1569, the bolvar family had one of the first dedicated side chapels. the majority of the wealth of simn de bolvar's descendants came from their estates. the most important was a sugar plantation with an encomienda that provided the labor needed to run the estate. another portion of the bolvars' wealth came from silver, gold, and copper mines. small gold deposits were first mined in venezuela in 1669, leading to the discovery of much more extensive copper deposits. from his mother's side (the palacios family), bolvar inherited the aroa copper mines at cocorote. native american and african slaves provided the majority of the labor in these mines.


=== 17th century ===
toward the end of the 17th century, copper mining became so prominent in venezuela that the metal became known as cobre caracas ("caracas copper"). many of the mines became the property of the bolvar family. bolvar's grandfather, juan de bolvar y martnez de villegas, paid 22,000 ducats to the monastery at santa maria de montserrat in 1728 for a title of nobility that had been granted by king philip v of spain for its maintenance. the crown never issued the patent of nobility, and so the purchase became the subject of lawsuits that were still in progress during bolvar's lifetime, when independence from spain made the point moot. (if the lawsuits had been successful, bolvar's older brother, juan vicente, would have become the marquess of san luis and viscount of cocorote.) bolvar ultimately devoted his personal fortune to the revolution. having been one of the wealthiest persons within the spanish american world at the beginning of the revolution, he died in poverty.


== early life ==


=== childhood ===

simn bolvar was born in a house in caracas, captaincy general of venezuela, on 24 july 1783. he was baptized as simn jos antonio de la santsima trinidad bolvar y palacios. his mother was mara de la concepcin palacios y blanco, and his father was colonel don juan vicente bolvar y ponte. he had two older sisters and a brother: mara antonia, juana, and juan vicente. another sister, mara del carmen, died at birth.when bolvar was an infant, he was cared for by doa ines manceba de miyares and the family's slave, hiplita. a couple of years later, he returned to the care of his parents, but this experience would have a major effect on his life. his father died before bolvar's third birthday to tuberculosis, and his mother died when he was almost nine.
after his mother's death, bolvar was placed in the custody of an instructor, miguel jos sanz, but this relationship did not work out and he was sent back home. he went on to receive private lessons from the renowned professors andrs bello, guillermo pelgrn, jose antonio negrete, fernando vides, father andjar, and don simn rodrguez, formerly known as simn carreo. don simn rodrguez became bolvar's teacher, friend and mentor. he taught him how to swim and ride horses, as well as about liberty, human rights, politics, history, and sociology. later in life, rodrguez was pivotal in bolvar's decision to start the revolution, instilling in him the ideas of liberty, enlightenment, and freedom. in the meantime, bolvar was mostly cared for by his nurse, his slave hiplita, whom he saw as both a mother and a father.


=== youth ===

when bolvar was fourteen, don simn rodrguez was forced to leave the country after being accused of involvement in a conspiracy against the spanish government in caracas. bolvar then entered the military academy of the milicias de aragua. in 1800, he was sent to spain to follow his military studies in madrid, where he remained until 1802. back in europe in 1804, he lived in france and traveled to different countries. while in milan, bolvar witnessed the coronation of napoleon as king of italy (a kingdom in personal union with france in modern northern italy), an event that left a profound impression on him. even if he disagreed with the crowning, he was highly sensitive to the popular veneration inspired by the hero.


== political and military career ==


=== venezuela and new granada, 18071821 ===


==== prelude, 18071810 ====

bolvar returned to venezuela in 1807. after a coup on 19 april 1810, venezuela achieved de facto independence when the supreme junta of caracas was established and the colonial administrators were deposed. the supreme junta sent a delegation to great britain to get british recognition and aid. this delegation presided by bolvar also included two future venezuelan notables andrs bello and luis lpez mndez. the trio met with francisco de miranda and persuaded him to return to his native land.


==== first republic of venezuela, 18111812 ====
in 1811, a delegation from the supreme junta, also including bolvar, and a crowd of commoners enthusiastically received miranda in la guaira. during the insurgence war conducted by miranda, bolvar was promoted to colonel and was made commandant of puerto cabello the following year, 1812. as royalist frigate captain domingo de monteverde was advancing into republican territory from the west, bolvar lost control of san felipe castle along with its ammunition stores on 30 june 1812. bolvar then retreated to his estate in san mateo.
miranda saw the republican cause as lost and signed a capitulation agreement with monteverde on 25 july, an action that bolvar and other revolutionary officers deemed treasonous. in one of bolvar's most morally dubious acts, he and others arrested miranda and handed him over to the spanish royal army at the port of la guaira. for his apparent services to the royalist cause, monteverde granted bolvar a passport, and bolvar left for curaao on 27 august. it must be said, though, that bolvar protested to the spanish authorities about the reasons why he handled miranda, insisting that he was not lending a service to the crown but punishing a defector. in 1813, he was given a military command in tunja, new granada (modern-day colombia), under the direction of the congress of united provinces of new granada, which had formed out of the juntas established in 1810.


==== second republic of venezuela (18131814) and exile ====

this was the beginning of the admirable campaign. on 24 may, bolvar entered mrida, where he was proclaimed el libertador ("the liberator"). this was followed by the occupation of trujillo on 9 june. six days later, and as a result of spanish massacres on independence supporters, bolvar dictated his famous "decree of war to the death", allowing the killing of any spaniard not actively supporting independence. caracas was retaken on 6 august 1813, and bolvar was ratified as el libertador, establishing the second republic of venezuela. the following year, because of the rebellion of jos toms boves and the fall of the republic, bolvar returned to new granada, where he commanded a force for the united provinces.
his forces entered bogot in 1814 and recaptured the city from the dissenting republican forces of cundinamarca. bolvar intended to march into cartagena and enlist the aid of local forces in order to capture the royalist town of santa marta. in 1815, however, after a number of political and military disputes with the government of cartagena, bolvar fled to jamaica, where he was denied support. after an assassination attempt in jamaica, he fled to haiti, where he was granted protection. he befriended alexandre ption, the president of the recently independent southern republic (as opposed to the kingdom of haiti in the north), and petitioned him for aid. he provided the south american leader with a multitude of provisions consisting of ships, men and weapons; only demanding in return that bolvar promise to abolish slavery in any of the lands he took back from spain. the pledge would indeed be upheld, and the abolition of slavery in the liberated territories would be regarded as one bolvar's main achievements.


==== campaigns in venezuela, 18161818 ====

in 1816, with haitian soldiers and vital material support, bolvar landed in venezuela and fulfilled his promise to ption to free spanish america's slaves on 2 june 1816.the expedition of the keys was led by bolivar and fought for venezuela in the east, while the guyana campaign started in the west and was led by manuel piar.
in july 1817, on a second expedition, he captured angostura after defeating the counter-attack of miguel de la torre. however, venezuela remained a captaincy of spain after the victory in 1818 by pablo morillo in the second battle of la puerta (es).after capturing angostura, and an unexpected victory in new granada, bolivar set up a temporary government in venezuela. this was the start of the third republic of venezuela. with this bolivar created the congress of angostura which following the wars would establish gran colombia, a state which includes today's territories of colombia, ecuador, panama, and venezuela.
to honor bolivar's efforts to help venezuela during its independence movement, the city of angostura was renamed to ciudad bolivar in 1846.


==== liberation of new granada and venezuela, 18191821 ====

on 15 february 1819, bolvar was able to open the venezuelan second national congress in angostura, in which he was elected president and francisco antonio zea was elected vice president. bolvar then decided that he would first fight for the independence of new granada, to gain resources of the viceroyalty, intending later to consolidate the independence of venezuela.the campaign for the independence of new granada, which included the crossing of the andes mountain range, one of history's great military feats, was consolidated with the victory at the battle of boyac on 7 august 1819. bolvar returned to angostura, when congress passed a law forming a greater republic of colombia on 17 december, making bolvar president and zea vice president, with francisco de paula santander vice president on the new granada side, and juan germn roscio vice president on the venezuela side.

morillo was left in control of caracas and the coastal highlands. after the restoration of the cdiz constitution, morillo ratified two treaties with bolvar on 25 november 1820, calling for a six-month armistice and recognizing bolvar as president of the republic. bolvar and morillo met in san fernando de apure on 27 november, after which morillo left venezuela for spain, leaving la torre in command.from his newly consolidated base of power, bolvar launched outright independence campaigns in venezuela and ecuador. these campaigns concluded with the victory at the battle of carabobo, after which bolvar triumphantly entered caracas on 29 june 1821. on 7 september 1821, gran colombia (a state covering much of modern colombia, ecuador, panama, and venezuela) was created, with bolvar as president and santander as vice president.


=== ecuador and peru, 18221824 ===
bolvar followed with the battle of bombona and the battle of pichincha, after which he entered quito on 16 june 1822. on 26 and 27 july 1822, bolvar held the guayaquil conference with the argentine general jos de san martn, who had received the title of "protector of peruvian freedom" in august 1821 after partially liberating peru from the spanish. thereafter, bolvar took over the task of fully liberating peru.

the peruvian congress named bolvar dictator of peru on 10 february 1824, which allowed him to reorganize completely the political and military administration. assisted by antonio jos de sucre, bolvar decisively defeated the spanish cavalry at the battle of junn on 6 august 1824. sucre destroyed the still numerically superior remnants of the spanish forces at ayacucho on 9 december 1824.
according to british historian robert harvey:

bolvar's achievements in peru had been as staggering as any in his career of a year, from holding a strip of the country's north coast while himself nearly moribund, he and sucre had taken on and defeated an army of 18,000 men and secured a country the size of nearly all of western europe...the investment of personal energy, the distances covered and the four army expeditions across supposedly impassable mountain ranges had qualified him for superhuman status...his stamina and military achievements put him at the forefront of the global heroes of history.
writing to united states secretary of state john quincy adams in 1824, united states consul in peru william tudor stated:

unfortunately for peru, the invaders who came to proclaim liberty and independence were cruel, rapacious, unprincipled and incapable. their mismanagement, their profligacy, and their thirst for plunder soon alienated the affections of the inhabitants.
even though bolvar condemned the corrupt practices of the spanish, he ordered some churches stripped of their decorations. on 19 march 1824, jos gabriel prez wrote to antonio jos de sucre about the orders given to him by bolvar; prez talked about "all the ordinary and extraordinary means" that should be applied to assure the subsistence of the patriot army. indeed, prez said that bolvar issued instructions to take from churches "all golden and silver jewels" in order to coin them and pay war expenditures. days later, bolvar himself said to sucre that there would be a complete lack of resources unless severe actions were taken against "the jewels of the churches, everywhere".


=== consolidation of independence, 18251830 ===


==== republic of bolivia ====
on 6 august 1825, at the congress of upper peru, the "republic of bolivia" was created. bolvar is thus one of the few people to have a country named after him. bolvar returned to caracas on 12 january 1827, and then back to bogot.bolvar had great difficulties maintaining control over the vast gran colombia. in 1826, internal divisions sparked dissent throughout the nation, and regional uprisings erupted in venezuela. the new south american union had revealed its fragility and appeared to be on the verge of collapse. to preserve the union, an amnesty was declared and an arrangement was reached with the venezuelan rebels, but this increased the political dissent in neighboring new granada. in an attempt to keep the nation together as a single entity, bolvar called for a constitutional convention at ocaa in march 1828.


==== struggles inside gran colombia ====

bolvar thought that a federation like the one founded in the united states was unworkable in the spanish america. for this reason, and to prevent a break-up, bolvar sought to implement a more centralist model of government in gran colombia, including some or all of the elements of the bolivian constitution he had written, which included a lifetime presidency with the ability to select a successor (although this presidency was to be held in check by an intricate system of balances).this move was considered controversial in new granada and was one of the reasons for the deliberations, which took place from 9 april to 10 june 1828. the convention almost ended up drafting a document which would have implemented a radically federalist form of government, which would have greatly reduced the powers of a central administration. the federalist faction was able to command a majority for the draft of a new constitution which has definite federal characteristics despite its ostensibly centralist outline. unhappy with what would be the ensuing result, pro-bolvar delegates withdrew from the convention, leaving it moribund.two months after the failure of this congress to write a new constitution, bolvar was declared president-liberator in colombia's "organic decree". he considered this a temporary measure, as a means to reestablish his authority and save the republic, although it increased dissatisfaction and anger among his political opponents. an assassination attempt on 25 september 1828 failed (in spanish it is indeed known as the noche septembrina), thanks to the help of his lover, manuela senz. bolvar afterward described manuela as "liberatrix of the liberator". dissent continued, and uprisings occurred in new granada, venezuela, and ecuador during the next two years.bolivar initially claimed to "forgive" those who were considered conspirators, members of the "santander" faction. eventually, though, he subjected them to court martial, after which those accused of being directly involved were executed, some without having their guilt fully established. santander, who had known in advance of the conspiracy and had not directly opposed it because of his differences with bolivar, was condemned to death. bolivar, though, commuted the sentence.
after, bolivar continued to govern in a rarefied environment, cornered by fractional disputes. uprisings occurred in new granada, venezuela, and ecuador during the following two years. the separatists accused him of betraying republican principles and of wanting to establish a permanent dictatorship. gran colombia declared war against peru when president general la mar invaded guayaquil. he was later defeated by marshall antonio jos de sucre in the battle of the portete de tarqui, 27 february 1829. sucre was killed on 4 june 1830. general juan jos flores wanted to separate the southern departments (quito, guayaquil, and azuay), known as the district of ecuador, from gran colombia to form an independent country and become its first president. venezuela was proclaimed independent on 13 january 1830 and jos antonio pez maintained the presidency of that country, banishing bolivar.


==== dissolution of gran colombia ====
for bolvar, south america was the fatherland. he dreamed of a united spanish america and in the pursuit of that purpose he not only created gran colombia but also the confederation of the andes whose aim was to unite the aforementioned with peru and bolivia. moreover, he promoted a network of treaties keeping the newly liberated south american countries together. nonetheless, he was unable to control the centripetal process which pushed outwards in all directions.
on 20 january 1830, as his dream fell apart, bolvar delivered his final address to the nation, announcing that he would be stepping down from the presidency of gran colombia. in his speech, a distraught bolvar urged the people to maintain the union and to be wary of the intentions of those who advocated for separation. (at the time, "colombians" referred to the people of gran colombia (venezuela, new granada, and ecuador), not modern-day colombia):

colombians! today i cease to govern you. i have served you for twenty years as soldier and leader. during this long period we have taken back our country, liberated three republics, fomented many civil wars, and four times i have returned to the people their omnipotence, convening personally four constitutional congresses. these services were inspired by your virtues, your courage, and your patriotism; mine is the great privilege of having governed you.
the constitutional congress convened on this day is charged by providence with the task of giving the nation the institutions she desires, following the course of circumstances and the nature of things.
fearing that i may be regarded as an obstacle to establishing the republic on the true base of its happiness, i personally have cast myself down from the supreme position of leadership to which your generosity had elevated me.
colombians! i have been the victim of ignominious suspicions, with no possible way to defend the purity of my principles. the same persons who aspire to the supreme command have conspired to tear your hearts from me, attributing to me their own motives, making me seem to be the instigator of projects they themselves have conceived, representing me, finally, as aspiring to a crown which they themselves have offered on more than one occasion and which i have rejected with the indignation of the fiercest republican. never, never, i swear to you, has it crossed my mind to aspire to a kingship that my enemies have fabricated in order to ruin me in your regard.
do not be deceived, colombians! my only desire has been to contribute to your freedom and to be the preservation of your peace of mind. if for this i am held guilty, i deserve your censure more than any man. do not listen, i beg you, to the vile slander and the tawdry envy stirring up discord on all sides. will you allow yourself to be deceived by the false accusations of my detractors? please don't be foolish!
colombians! gather around the constitutional congress. it represents the wisdom of the nation, the legitimate hope of the people, and the final point of reunion of the patriots. its sovereign decrees will determine our lives, the happiness of the republic, and the glory of colombia. if dire circumstances should cause you to abandon it, there will be no health for the country, and you will drown in the ocean of anarchy, leaving as your children's legacy nothing but crime, blood, and death.

fellow countrymen! hear my final plea as i end my political career; in the name of colombia i ask you, beg you, to remain united, lest you become the assassins of the country and your own executioners.
bolvar ultimately failed in his attempt to prevent the collapse of the union. gran colombia was dissolved later that year and was replaced by the republics of venezuela, new granada, and ecuador. ironically, these countries were established as centralist nations, and would be governed for decades this way by leaders who, during bolvar's last years, had accused him of betraying republican principles and of wanting to establish a permanent dictatorship. these separatists, among them jos antonio pez and francisco de paula santander, had justified their opposition to bolvar for this reason and publicly denounced him as a monarch. some of them had in the past been accused of plotting against bolvar's life (santander, who governed the second centralist government of new granada, was associated with the september conspiracy).
jos mara obando, the first president of the republic of new granada (that succeeded the gran colombia), had been directly linked to the assassination of antonio jos de sucre in 1830. sucre was regarded by some as a political threat because of his popularity after he led a resounding patriot victory at the battle of ayacucho, ending the war against the spanish empire in south america. bolvar also considered him his direct successor and had attempted to make him vice president of gran colombia after francisco de paula santander was exiled in 1828.


==== aftermath ====
for the rest of the 19th century and into the early 20th century, the political environment of latin america was fraught with civil wars and characterized by a sociopolitical phenomenon known as caudillismo, which became very common in venezuela, especially after 1830.indeed, such struggles already existed shortly after the patriot victory over the loyalists because the former spanish colonies created new nations that proclaimed their own autonomous states, which produced military confrontations with political conspirations that sent some of the former independence heroes into exile. moreover, there were attempts by the spanish monarchy to reconquer their former settlements in the americas through expeditions that would help the remaining loyalist forces and advocates. however, the attempts generally failed in venezuela, per and mexico; thus, the loyalist resistance forces against the republic were finally defeated.the main characteristic of caudillismo was the arrival of authoritarian but charismatic political figures who would typically rise to power in an unconventional way, often legitimizing their right to govern through undemocratic processes. these caudillos maintained their control primarily on the basis of their personalities, as well as skewed interpretations of their popularity and what constituted a majority among the masses. on his deathbed, bolvar envisaged the emergence of countless caudillos competing for the pieces of the great nation he once dreamed about.


== final months and death ==

saying that "all who served the revolution have plowed the sea", bolvar finally resigned the presidency on 27 april 1830, intending to leave the country for exile in europe. he had already sent several crates containing his belongings and writings ahead of him to europe, but he died before setting sail from cartagena.

it is said that before simn bolvar had passed away, he had declared that "america is ungovernable." bolvar was a man who had seen the negative in things. this negativity had grown from the distances that had separated the large continent or from the differences in the cultures, languages, ethnicities and the races of the people. another factor could have been from the lack of political unity, but it is unclear what had led him to being pessimistic. these factors had caused bolvar to put his hope on hold of uniting the sovereign territory. old colonial cities had been separated and new trading centers were separated by great geographical features such as mountains, high deserts and arid plains. these were all factors in which played a role and were responsible for the broken states during a time where wars of independence had risen.on 17 december 1830, at the age of 47, simn bolvar died of tuberculosis in the quinta de san pedro alejandrino in santa marta, gran colombia (now colombia). on his deathbed, bolvar asked his aide-de-camp, general daniel f. o'leary, to burn the remaining extensive archive of his writings, letters, and speeches. o'leary disobeyed the order and his writings survived, providing historians with a wealth of information about bolvar's liberal philosophy and thought, as well as details of his personal life, such as his long love affair with manuela senz. shortly before her own death in 1856, senz augmented this collection by giving o'leary her own letters from bolvar.

bolvar's remains were buried in the cathedral of santa marta. twelve years later, in 1842, at the request of president jos antonio pez, they were moved from santa marta to caracas, where they were buried in the cathedral of caracas together with the remains of his wife and parents. in 1876, he was moved to a monument set up for his interment at the national pantheon of venezuela. the quinta near santa marta has been preserved as a museum with numerous references to his life. in 2010, symbolic remains of bolvar's later-years lover, manuela senz, were also interred in venezuela's national pantheon.in january 2008, then-president of venezuela hugo chvez set up a commission to investigate theories that bolvar was the victim of an assassination. on several occasions, chvez claimed that bolvar was in fact poisoned by "new granada traitors". in april 2010, infectious diseases specialist paul auwaerter studied records of bolvar's symptoms and concluded that he might have suffered from chronic arsenic poisoning, but that both acute poisoning and murder were unlikely. in july 2010, bolvar's body was ordered to be exhumed to advance the investigations. in july 2011, international forensics experts released their report, claiming there was no proof of poisoning or any other unnatural cause of death.


== private life ==


=== marriage ===

in 1799, following the early deaths of his father juan vicente (dead since 1786) and his mother concepcin (who died in 1792), bolvar traveled to mexico, france, and spain, at the age of 16 years, to complete his education. while in madrid during 1802 and after a two-year courtship, he married mara teresa rodrguez del toro y alaiza, who was to be his only wife. she was related to the aristocratic families of the marquis del toro of caracas and the marquis de inicio of madrid.eight months after returning to venezuela with him, she died from yellow fever on 22 january 1803. bolvar was so devastated by this loss that his relatives feared for his life. he swore never to marry again, a promise he kept. years later bolvar would refer to the death of his wife as the turning point of his life. indeed, in 1828, he told louis peru de lacroix, a biographer of bolvar who served as one of his generals, the following words:

you then [...] got married at the age of 45; [...] i was not even 18 years old when i did the same, and i was not even nearly 19 years old when i was widowed; i loved my wife dearly, and her death made me swear not to get married again, and i kept my word. look the way things are: if i were not widowed, my life would have maybe been different; i would not be the general bolvar nor the libertador, though i agree that my temper is not suitable for being the landlord of san mateo.
not surprisingly, spanish historian salvador de madariaga refers to the death of bolivar's wife as one of the key moments in hispanic america's history. in 1804, he traveled again to europe in an attempt to ease his pain and began falling into a dissolute life. it was then that he met again with his old teacher simn rodrguez in paris, who little by little was able to transform his acute depression into a sense of commitment towards a greater cause: the independence of venezuela. he lived in napoleonic france for a while and undertook the grand tour. during this time in europe, bolvar met the intellectual explorer, alexander von humboldt in rome. humboldt later wrote: "i was wrong back then, when i judged him a puerile man, incapable of realizing so grand an ambition."


=== affairs and lovers ===

bolvar had several love affairs. most of them lasted just a short time. historians, scholars and biographers often agree with the names of the most prominent women who stood with bolvar, such as josefina "pepita" machado, fanny du villars and manuela senz.
manuela senz was the most important of those women. she was more than a lover in bolvar's later life; she became a trustworthy confidant and advisor. moreover, manuela saved bolvar's life during the september conspiracy of 1828 in which bolvar was about to be killed. during this assassination attempt, manuela diverted the assassins and thus gave bolvar enough time to escape from his room.bolvar and manuela met in quito on 22 june 1822 and they began a long-term affair. the relationship was controversial at the time, because manuela was already married to james thorne, but they became estranged in 1822 due to irreconcilable differences. the emotional ties between manuela and bolvar were strong, and manuela attempted suicide when she received the news of bolvar's death.
despite sometimes living in the same south american cities (such as bogot, quito and lima), bolvar and manuela did not always have a face-to-face relationship. this romance was clear in their letters, but few of them have survived. most of her letters were destroyed after manuela's death. contrary to the arguments exposed by heinz dieterich, carlos lvarez sa, and a book edited by fundacin editorial el perro y la rana publishing house in 2007, several letters attributed to both bolvar and manuela are intentional forgeries.in his memoirs of simn bolvar, henri la fayette villaume ducoudray holstein, he has been called a "not-always-reliable and never impartial witness", described the young bolvar, who was attempting to seize power in venezuela and new granada in 18141816. ducoudray holstein joined bolvar and served on his staff as an officer during that period.
he describes bolvar as a coward who repeatedly abandoned his military commission in front of the enemy and also as a great lover of women who was accompanied at all times by two or more of his mistresses during the military operations. he would not hesitate to stop the fleet transporting the whole army and bound for margarita island during two days to wait for his mistress to join his ship. according to ducoudray holstein, bolvar behaved essentially as an opportunist preferring intrigues and secret manipulation to an open fight. he was also deemed incompetent in military matters by systematically avoiding any risks and permanently being anxious for his own safety.
in the diario de bucaramanga, bolvar's opinion of ducoudray is presented when louis peru de lacroix asked who had been bolvar's aides-de-camp since he had been general; he mentioned charles eloi demarquet and ducoudray. bolvar confirmed the first but denied the second, saying that he had met him in 1815 and accepted his services and even admitted him to his general staff, but "i never trusted him enough to make him my aide-de-camp; to the contrary, i had a very unfavorable idea of his person and his services." he stated thst ducoudray's departure after only a brief stay had been a "real pleasure."


== relatives ==
bolvar had no children, possibly because of infertility caused by having contracted measles and mumps as a child. his closest living relatives descend from his sisters and brother. one of his sisters died in infancy. his sister juana bolvar y palacios married their maternal uncle, dionisio palacios y blanco, and had two children, guillermo and benigna. guillermo palacios died fighting alongside his uncle simn in the battle of la hogaza on 2 december 1817. benigna had two marriages, the first to pedro briceo mndez and the second to pedro amestoy. their great-grandchildren, bolvar's closest living relatives, pedro, and eduardo mendoza goiticoa lived in caracas as of 2009.
his eldest sister, mara antonia, married pablo clemente francia and had four children: josefa, anacleto, valentina, and pablo. mara antonia became bolvar's agent to deal with his properties while he served as president of gran colombia and she was an executrix of his will. she retired to bolvar's estate in macarao, which she inherited from him.his older brother, juan vicente, who died in 1811 on a diplomatic mission to the united states, had three children born out of wedlock whom he recognized: juan, fernando simn, and felicia bolvar tinoco. bolvar provided for the children and their mother after his brother's death. bolvar was especially close to fernando and in 1822 sent him to study in the united states, where he attended the university of virginia. in his long life, fernando had minor participation in some of the major political events of venezuelan history and also traveled and lived extensively throughout europe. he had three children, benjamn bolvar gauthier, santiago hernndez bolvar, and claudio bolvar taraja. fernando died in 1898 at the age of 88.


== personal beliefs ==


=== politics ===
bolvar was an admirer of both the american revolution and the french revolution. bolvar even enrolled his nephew, fernando bolvar, in a private school in philadelphia, germantown academy, and paid for his education, including attendance at thomas jefferson's university of virginia. while he was an admirer of u.s. independence, he did not believe that its governmental system could work in latin america. thus, he claimed that the governance of heterogeneous societies like venezuela "will require a firm hand".bolvar felt that the u.s. had been established in land especially fertile for democracy. by contrast, he referred to spanish america as having been subject to the "triple yoke of ignorance, tyranny, and vice". if a republic could be established in such a land, in his mind, it would have to make some concessions in terms of liberty. this is shown when bolvar blamed the fall of the first republic on his subordinates trying to imitate "some ethereal republic" and in the process, not paying attention to the gritty political reality of south america.among the books accompanying him as he traveled were adam smith's the wealth of nations, voltaire's letters and, when he was writing the bolivian constitution, montesquieu's the spirit of the laws. his bolivian constitution placed him within the camp of what would become latin american conservatism in the later nineteenth century. the bolivian constitution intended to establish a lifelong presidency and a hereditary senate, essentially recreating the british unwritten constitution, as it existed at the time.
according to carlos fuentes:

how to govern ourselves after winning independence. it can be said that the liberator exhausted his soul trying to find an answer to that question...bolvar tried to avoid the extremes that would overwhelm spanish america all along the nineteenth century and part of the twentieth. tyranny or anarchy? 'do not aim at what is impossible to attain, because in the quest for liberty we may fall into tyranny. absolute liberty always leads to absolute power and among these two extremes is social liberty'. in order to find this equilibrium, bolvar proposed a 'clever despotism', a strong executive power able to impose equality there where racial inequality prevailed. bolvar warned against an 'aristocracy of rank, employment and fortune' that while 'referring to liberty and guarantee' it would just be for themselves but not for levelling with members of lower classes'...he is the disciple of montesquieu in his insistence that institutions have to be adapted to culture.


=== freemasonry ===
similarly to some others in the history of american independence (george washington, miguel hidalgo, jos de san martn, bernardo o'higgins, francisco de paula santander, antonio nario, and francisco de miranda), simn bolvar was a freemason. he was initiated in 1803 in the masonic lodge lautaro, which operated in cdiz, spain. it was in this lodge that he first met some of his revolutionary peers, such as jos de san martn. in may 1806 he was conferred the rank of master mason in the "scottish mother of st. alexander of scotland" in paris. during his time in london, he frequented "the great american reunion" lodge in london, founded by francisco de miranda. in april 1824, simn bolvar was given the 33rd degree of inspector general honorary.he founded the masonic lodge no. 2 of peru, named "order and liberty".


== legacy ==


=== political legacy ===
due to the historical relevance of bolvar as a key element during the process of independence in hispanic america, his memory has been strongly attached to sentiments of nationalism and patriotism, being a recurrent theme of rhetoric in politics. since the image of bolvar became an important part to the national identities of venezuela, colombia, panama, ecuador, peru and bolivia, his mantle is often claimed by hispanic american politicians all across the political spectrum.in venezuela, bolvar left behind a militarist legacy with multiple governments utilizing the memory, image and written legacy of bolvar as important parts of their political messages and propaganda. bolvar disapproved of the excesses of "party spirit" and "factions", which led to an anti-political environment in venezuela. for much of the 1800s, venezuela was ruled by caudillos, with six rebellions occurring to take control of venezuela between 1892 and 1900 alone. the militarist legacy was then used by the nationalist dictatorship of marcos prez jimnez and more recently the socialist political movement led by hugo chvez.


=== monuments and physical legacy ===
the nations of bolivia and the bolivarian republic of venezuela, and their respective currencies (the bolivian boliviano and the venezuelan bolvar), are all named after bolvar. additionally, most cities and towns in colombia and venezuela are built around a main square known as plaza bolvar, as is the case with bogot. in this example, most governmental buildings and public structures are located on or around the plaza, including the national capitol and the palace of justice. besides quito and caracas, there are monuments to bolvar in the latin american capitals of lima, buenos aires, havana, mexico city, panama city, paramaribo, san jos, santo domingo and sucre. in bogot, the simn bolvar park has hosted many concerts.outside of latin america, the variety of monuments to simn bolvar are a continuing testament to his legacy. these include statues in many capitals around the world, including algiers, bucharest, london, minsk, moscow, new delhi, ottawa, paris, prague, port-au-prince, rome, sofia, tehran, vienna and washington, d.c.. several cities in spain, especially in the basque country, have constructed monuments to bolvar, including a large monument in bilbao and a comprehensive venezuelan government-funded museum in cenarruza-puebla de bolvar, his ancestral hometown. in the us, an imposing bronze equestrian statue of simn bolvar stands at the southern entrance to central park at the avenue of the americas in new york city which also celebrates bolvar's contributions to latin america. the bolivar peninsula in texas; bolivar county, mississippi; bolivar, new york; bolivar, west virginia; bolivar, ohio; and bolivar, tennessee are also named in his honor.monuments to bolvar's military legacy also comprise one of venezuelan navy's sail training barques, which is named after him, and the uss simon bolivar, a benjamin franklin-class fleet ballistic missile submarine which served with the u.s. navy between 1965 and 1995.
minor planet 712 boliviana discovered by max wolf is named in his honor. the name was suggested by camille flammarion. the first venezuelan satellite, venesat-1, was given the alternative name simn bolvar after him.his birthday is a public holiday in venezuela and bolivia.

monuments
		
		
		
		
		
		
		
		


== in popular culture ==

bolvar has been depicted in opera, literature, film, and other media, and continues to be a part of the popular culture in many countries. in 1883, to celebrate 100 years since his birth, the italian musician nicol gabrielli composed the triumphal march simn bolvar and dedicated it to then president of venezuela antonio guzmn blanco. in 1943 darius milhaud composed the opera bolvar. he is also the central character in gabriel garca mrquez's 1989 novel the general in his labyrinth, in which he is portrayed in a less heroic but more humane manner than in most other parts of his legacy. in 1969, maximilian schell played the role of simn bolvar in the film of the same name by director alessandro blasetti, which also featured actress rosanna schiaffino. bolvar's life was also the basis of the 2013 film libertador, starring dgar ramrez and directed by alberto arvelo. in an episode of the spanish tv series the ministry of time, "tiempo de ilustrados (time of the enlightened)", the time agents help him win the heart of his future wife, as this was considered fundamental for bolvar to fulfil his destiny. later in the second season of the series the time agents will find him again in 1828 (two years before his death) to avoid his murder, planned by santander's followers. as of 2019, a netflix series has been released depicting bolvar's life and the major events surrounding it. the netflix series is a colombian production with spanish as the main language.
in may 2020, he was released as the playable leader of gran colombia in civilization vi's new frontier pass. his leader ability allows the recruitment of "comandante generals," which are real-life generals who served with him, such as jos antonio pez, antonio jos de sucre, and francisco de paula santander.


== see also ==

bolivarian revolution
bolivarianism
statue of simn bolvar (houston)
toussaint louverture


== notes ==


== references ==

cited sources


== further reading ==
arana, marie. bolivar: american liberator. new york: simon & schuster, 2013.
bushnell, david. the liberator, simn bolvar. new york: alfred a. knopf, 1970.
bushnell, david (ed.) and fornoff, fred (tr.), el libertador: writings of simn bolvar, oxford university press, 2003. isbn 978-0-19-514481-9
bushnell, david and macaulay, neill. the emergence of latin america in the nineteenth century (second edition). oxford and new york: oxford university press, 1994. isbn 978-0-19-508402-3
ducoudray holstein, h.l.v. memoirs of simn bolvar. boston: goodrich, 1829.
gmez martnez, jos luis. "la encrucijada del cambio: simn bolvar entre dos paradigmas (una reflexin ante la encrucijada postindustrial)". cuadernos americanos 104 (2004): 1132.
harvey, robert. "liberators: latin america's struggle for independence, 18101830". john murray, london (2000). isbn 978-0-7195-5566-4
higgins, james (editor). the emancipation of peru: british eyewitness accounts, 2014. online at https://sites.google.com/site/jhemanperu
lacroix, luis per de. diario de bucaramanga. caracas: ministerio del poder popular para la comunicacin y la informacin, 2009.
ludwig, emil. "bolivar: the life of an idealist," alliance book corporation, new york, 1942; popular biography
lynch, john. simon bolivar: a life paperback (yale up, 2007), a standard scholarly biography
lynch, john. simn bolvar and the age of revolution. london: university of london institute of latin american studies, 1983. isbn 978-0-901145-54-3
lynch, john. the spanish american revolutions, 18081826 (second edition). new york: w.w. norton & co., 1986. isbn 978-0-393-95537-8
madariaga, salvador de. bolvar. westport: greenwood press, 1952. isbn 978-0-313-22029-6
masur, gerhard (1948). simn bolvar (second edition, translation by pedro martn de la cmara). bogot: fundacin para la investigacin y la cultura, 2008.
marx, karl. "bolvar y ponte" in the new american cyclopaedia: a popular dictionary of general knowledge, vol. iii. new york: d. appleton & co., 1858.
o'leary, daniel florencio. bolvar and the war of independence/memorias del general daniel florencio o'leary: narracin (abridged version). austin: university of texas, [1888] 1970. isbn 978-0-292-70047-5
racine, karen. "simn bolvar and friends: recent biographies of independence figures in colombia and venezuela" history compass 18#3 (feb 2020) https://doi.org/10.1111/hic3.12608


== external links ==

archivo del libertador (in spanish) 12,000+ transcribed documents of the libertador, from 1799 to 1830.
simn bolvar on in our time at the bbc
the life of simn bolvar
the louverture project: simn bolvar  information about the support bolvar received from haiti.
in profile: simn bolvar  the liberator
biography of simn bolvar
(in spanish) glrbv.org: biography
"building a new history by exhuming bolvar" simon romero, the new york times, 3 august 2010
"bolivar: american liberator" on youtube lecture by marie arana, the john w. kluge center, the library of congress, 6 june 2013
simn bolvar at find a grave
newspaper clippings about simn bolvar in the 20th century press archives of the zbw