lady l is a 1965 comedy film based on the novel by romain gary and directed by peter ustinov. starring sophia loren, paul newman, david niven and cecil parker, the film focuses on an elderly corsican lady as she recalls the loves of her life, including an anarchist and a parisian aristocrat.


== plot ==
as she approaches her 80th birthday, the sophisticated and still attractive lady lendale recounts to her biographer, sir percy, the story of her life.
fleeing her humble origins in corsica, she traveled to paris, where she found work in a brothel. there she falls in love with a thief and anarchist, armand, and becomes pregnant by him. but before he can use a bomb to assassinate a bavarian prince, she meets lord lendale, who is so enchanted by the young woman that he offers to overlook armand's activities if she will agree to marry him.
lady l becomes a woman of means, moving in high society, and together she and lord lendale raise a large family. in the end, however, she reveals their secret: that she has continued to be the lover of armand, who has fathered all their children while posing as the family's chauffeur.


== cast ==
sophia loren as lady louise lendale / lady l
paul newman as armand denis
david niven as dicky, lord lendale
marcel dalio as sapper
cecil parker as sir percy
philippe noiret as ambroise grme
jacques dufilho dufilho as bealu
eugene deckers as koenigstein
daniel emilfork as kobeleff
hella petri as madam
jean wiener as krajewski
roger trapp as police inspectordubaron
jean rupert
joe dassin as a police inspector
jacques legras as a police inspector
mario feliciani as italian anarchist
sacha pitoff as bomb-throwing revolutionary
arthur howard as butler
dorothy reynolds
jacques ciron
hazel hughes
michel piccolii as lecoeur
claude dauphin as inspector mercier
catherine allgret as pantoufle
france arnel as brunette
dorothe blank as blonde girl
jean-paul cauvin as the little orphan
lo ann chan as the chinese girl
sylvain levignac
laurence lignires as high society girl
tanya lopert as agneau
moustache as delcour
john wood (uncredited) as the photographer
jenny orlans as blonde girl
peter ustinov as prince otto of bavaria
janet wilson as an extra


== production ==
mgm spent $2 million on pre-production for the film before cancelling the project.it was later restarted as a co-production between france, italy and the united kingdom. castle howard in yorkshire was used for the shooting of some scenes.


== release ==
the film had its world premiere at the empire, leicester square in the west end of london on 25 november 1965.


== reception ==
the film was not profitable.


== references ==