lady snowblood (japanese: , hepburn: shurayuki-hime) is a 1973 japanese jidaigeki film directed by toshiya fujita and starring meiko kaji. based on the manga series of the same name by kazuo koike and kazuo kamimura, the film recounts the tale of yuki (kaji), a woman who seeks vengeance upon three of the people who raped her mother and killed her father and brother. the film's narrative is told out of chronological order, jumping between present and past events. alongside kaji, the film's cast includes toshio kurosawa, masaaki daimonm, miyoko akaza, and k nishimura.
lady snowblood was released theatrically in japan on 1 december 1973, and was distributed by toho. it spawned a sequel, love song of vengeance (1974), and served as inspiration for the quentin tarantino film kill bill.


== plot ==
in 1874, a deathly-ill woman named sayo gives birth to a baby girl in a women's prison. naming the child yuki from seeing the snow outside, sayo confided to the inmates who helped deliver the baby how she was brutally raped by three of the four criminals who murdered her husband tora and their son shiro a year ago. while she managed to stab her captor shokei tokuichi to death when the chance presented itself, she was arrested and imprisoned for life. sayo then seduced many prison guards in order to conceive yuki.  her final words were for the child to be raised to carry out the vengeance against the three remaining tormentors. in meiji 15 (1882), the child yuki undergoes brutal training in sword fighting under the priest dkai to become her mother's wrath incarnate.
yuki, now twenty and an assassin going by the name shurayuki-hime, blocks the path of several men and a rickshaw and kills them and their leader shibayama using a sword concealed in the handle of an umbrella. yuki appears in a poor village looking for a man called matsuemon, the leader of an underground organization of street beggars, and asks him to find her mother's surviving tormentors in return for having killed shibayama for him. matsuemon's intel leads her to takemura banz, an alcoholic wreck with gambling debts whose daughter kobue works as a prostitute to support him. after convincing the gambling house's owners to pardon banz after he was caught cheating in a card game, yuki leads him to the beach and remorselessly kills him after revealing her identity. yuki then learns that the last of her mother's rapists, tsukamoto gishir, had suspiciously died in a ship wreck three years prior when she first attempted to find him.
after attacking gishir's tombstone in frustration, yuki finds herself being followed by a reporter named ryrei ashio. she warns him to stay away from her. ashio learned of yuki's story from dkai who persuaded him to publish it as a means to draw out one of sayo's tormentors, and the man who murdered shiro: kitahama okono. okono sends men to kidnap ashio, threatening him with torture for yuki's location, but ashio refuses to tell. yuki enters okono's estate and kills several of okono's men while pursuing okono. yuki and ryrei find okono's dying body hanging within a room. yuki slices okono in half.
ashio tells yuki that gishir is his father, and had faked his death when he learned of yuki's mission. she finds gishir at a masquerade ball and kills a man acting as his decoy. ashio and yuki find and follow the real gishir, who shoots ashio. wounded, ashio grapples with gishir and stops him from shooting yuki as she swings on a lamp between balconies. yuki stabs through ashio into gishir's chest. she then cuts gishir's throat as he shoots her. he falls over a railing and onto the ground floor full of guests.
yuki, wounded, stumbles outside where she is stabbed by a waiting kobue, who has been pursuing yuki all this while in her own quest to avenge her father's murder. yuki manages to escape, only to collapse on the snow, apparently dead. the following morning, however, she opens her eyes.


== cast ==


== production ==
lady snowblood was produced on a relatively low budget and filmed with a minimal length of film (20,000 feet). at one point, a special effect blood spatter went wrong, covering meiko kaji in fake blood.


== release and reception ==
lady snowblood was released in japan on 1 december 1973, where it was distributed by toho.on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 100% based on seven reviews, with an average rating of 8.05/10. tv guide gave the film three-out-of-five stars, calling it "certainly entertaining, but unnecessarily distancing".


== sequel and influence ==
the film spawned a sequel, lady snowblood: love song of vengeance, released in 1974. another adaptation of the original manga, titled the princess blade, was released in 2001.lady snowblood was a major inspiration for quentin tarantino's kill bill. according to meiko kaji, tarantino made the cast and crew of kill bill watch dvds of lady snowblood during filming breaks.the music video for "rockstar" by post malone featuring 21 savage, references scenes from lady snowblood.additionally a 1977 hong kong martial arts film broken oath directed by jeong chang-hwa and starring angela mao in the leading role is also an unofficial remake of lady snowblood.


== home media ==
lady snowblood was released on vhs in 1997, and was later released on dvd by animeigo in 2004. in 2012, the film was released in a box set with lady snowblood 2: love song of vengeance on blu-ray and dvd by arrow video. in january 2016, the film was again released with love song of vengeance on blu-ray and dvd by the criterion collection.


== references ==


=== bibliography ===


== external links ==
lady snowblood at imdb
lady snowblood at the japanese movie database (in japanese)
lady snowblood at rotten tomatoes
the complete lady snowblood: flowers of carnage an essay by howard hampton at the criterion collection