narasimha (sanskrit: , iast: narasiha, iso: narasiha,  lit. man-lion) is a fierce avatar of the hindu god vishnu, one who incarnates in the form of part lion and part man to destroy evil and end religious persecution and calamity on earth, thereby restoring dharma.narasimha iconography shows him with a human torso and lower body, with a lion face and claws, typically with a demon hiranyakashipu in his lap whom he is in the process of defeating. the demon is the powerful brother of evil hiranyaksha who had been previously defeated by vishnu, who hated vishnu for defeating his brother. hiranyakashipu gains special powers by which he could not be killed during the day or night, inside or outside the house, any place in the world i.e. neither in sky nor on land nor in heaven nor in pataala, by any weapon, and by man, god, asura or animal. endowed with new powers, hiranyakashipu creates chaos, persecutes all devotees of vishnu including his own son. vishnu understands the demon's power, then creatively adapts into a mixed avatar that is neither man nor animal and kills the demon at the junction of day and night, inside and outside. narasimha is known primarily as the 'great protector' who specifically defends and protects his devotees from evil. the most popular narasimha mythology is the legend that protects his devotee prahlada, and creatively destroys prahlada's demonic father and tyrant hiranyakashipu.narasimha is one of the major deity in vaishnavism. narasimha legends are revered in vaikhanasas, sri vaishnavism, sadh vaishnavism and various other vaishnavism traditions of hinduism. he is celebrated in many regional hindu temples, texts, performance arts and festivals such as holika prior to the hindu spring festival of colors called holi. the earliest representation, dating back to the 4th-century ce, of narasimha is from kondamotu in coastal andhra. other older known artworks of narasimha have been found at several sites across uttar pradesh and andhra pradesh, such as at the mathura archaeological site. these have been variously dated between 2nd and 4th-century ce.


== etymology ==

in sanskrit the word narasimha consists of two words "nara" which means man, and "simha" which means lion. together the term means "man-lion", referring to a mixed creature avatar of vishnu. additionally, the word "singh" is often used in place of "simha" which also means lion in sanskrit and other indian languages.
he is known as nrisimha, nrisingha, narasingha, narasingh, narsingh, narasimba and narasinghar in derivative languages. his other names are agnilochana () - the one who has fiery eyes, bhairavadambara () - the one who causes terror by roaring, karala () - the one who has a wide mouth and projecting teeth, hiranyakashipudvamsa () - the one who killed hiranyakashipu, nakhastra () - the one for whom nails are his weapons, sinhavadana () - the whose face is of lion and mrigendra () - king of animals or lion.


== texts ==


=== vedas ===
the vishnu hymn 1.154 of the rigveda (1700-1200 bce) contains a verse with allusions to a "wild beast, dread, prowling, mountain-roaming", which has been interpreted by some to be the narasiha legend. another hymn 8.14 alludes to the namuci legend with "waters' foam you tore off, indra, the head of namuci, subduing all contending hosts", but the hymns does not present details.a more complete version of the namuci legend is found in shatapatha brahmana of the yajurveda in chapter 12.7.3. other references to narasimha are found in the vedic texts vajaseneyi samhita 10.34, pancavimsa brahmana 12.6.8 and taittiriya brahmana 1.7.1.6.


==== the indra-namuci legend ====
narasimha likely has roots in the metaphors filled indra-namuci legend in the vedas. indra is the dharmic leader of the devas who commands lightning, thunder, rain and rivers, while namuci is a deceptive demigod asura in competition for power. namuci suggests peace to indra, which the latter accepts. he demands indra to promise that he will neither try to slay him with his "palm of the hand nor with the fist", neither in day nor in night, neither "anything that the dry" nor "anything that is moist". indra agrees.after the deal is done, namuci carries away all that nourishes the devas: the soma drink, the essence of food and the strength of indra. the leader of the gods finds himself conflicted, feels bound by his promise. indra then meets saraswati (goddess of knowledge) and ashvins.  they reply they will deal with namuci, get it all back, if indra agrees to share his powers, the essence of food and the soma drink with them. indra agrees. the gods and the goddess then come up with a creative plan. they pour out "foam of water" as a thunderbolt, which is neither dry nor moist, and the evil asura namuci is attacked and killed when it is neither day nor night.after namuci is killed, the gods get all the powers back, but discover that namuci had drunk the soma already. the good was thus now mixed with his badness of his blood, which they did not want to drink. so, they extract the good out from the bad. thus, good returns to the devas, the bad is discarded.according to deborah soifer, the vedic legend has many parallels with the narasimha legend, it has the same plot, the same "neither-nor" constraints, and the same creative spirit that allows the good to vanquish the evil. further, the sanskrit words and phrasing such as "neither palm nor fist" and "neither day nor night" in the later hindu texts is the same as in the vedic texts. this suggests a link and continuity between the vedic namuci legend and the later narasimha legend in the puranas. according to walter ruben, both versions along with several other legends in ancient and medieval texts reflect the indian tradition against despots and tyrants who abuse power.


=== puranas ===
there are references to narasiha in a variety of puras, with 17 different versions of the main narrative. the valmiki ramayana (7.24), harivaa (41 & 3.41-47), viu pura (1.16-20), bhagavata pura (canto 7), agni pura (4.2-3), brahma pura(2.5.3-29), vayu pura (67.61-66), brahma-pura  (213.44-79), viudharmottara pura(1.54), krma pura (1.15.18-72), matsya pura(161-163), padma pura(uttara-khaa 5.42), iva pura (2.5.43 & 3.10-12), linga purana (1.95-96) and skanda pura 7 (2.18.60-130) all contain depictions of the narasiha avatra.


=== other texts ===
narasimha is also found and is the focus of nrisimha tapaniya upanishad.


== history ==


=== prahlda legend ===

the bhagavata pura describes that vishnu, in his previous avatar as varha, killed the evil asura hiraayaka. the younger brother of hirayaka, demon king hirayakaipu, hated vishnu and wanted revenge. he undertook many years of austere penance to gain special powers. thereafter, brahma offered hirayakaipu a boon. hirayakaipu asked, "grant me that i not die within any residence or outside any residence, during the daytime or at night, nor on the ground or in the sky. grant me that my death not be brought about by any weapon, nor by any human being or animal. grant me that i not meet death from any entity, living or nonliving created by you. grant me, further, that i not be killed by any demigod or demon or by any great snake from the lower planets." brahma granted him the boon, and hirayakaipu gained these powers.hirayakaipu, once powerful and invincible with the new boon, began to persecute those who were devotees of vishnu. hirayakaipu had a son, prahlda, who disagreed and rebelled against his father. prahlda became a devotee of vishnu. this angered hirayakaipu, who tried to kill the boybut with each attempt, prahlda was protected by viu's mystical power. when asked, prahlda refused to acknowledge his father as the supreme lord of the universe and claimed that viu is all-pervading and omnipresent.
hirayakaipu pointed to a nearby pillar and asked if 'his viu' is in it and said to his son prahlda, "o most unfortunate prahlda, you have always described a supreme being other than me, a supreme being who is above everything, who is the controller of everyone, and who is all-pervading. but where is he? if he is everywhere, then why is he not present before me in this pillar?" prahlda then answered, "he was, he is and he will be."
in an alternate version of the story, prahlda answered,he is in pillars, and he is in the smallest twig.
hirayakaipu, unable to control his anger, smashed the pillar with his mace, and following a tumultuous sound, viu in the form of narasiha appeared from it and moved to attack hirayakaipu in defense of prahlda. in order to kill hirayakaipu and not upset the boon given by brahma, the form of narasiha was chosen. hirayakaipu could not be killed by human, deva or animal. narasiha was none of these, as he is a form of viu incarnate as a part-human, part-animal.  he came upon hirayakaipu at twilight (when it is neither day nor night) on the threshold of a courtyard (neither indoors nor out), and put the demon on his thighs (neither earth nor space). using his sharp fingernails (neither animate nor inanimate) as weapons, he disemboweled and killed the demon king.narasimha was in rage and seeing this, lord brahma sent prahlad to pacify him. prahlad sang hymns and the 'ugra' narasimha now became peaceful 'soumya' or 'shant' narasimha.in an alternate version, the shaiva scriptures narrate that god shiva assumed the avatar (incarnation) of sharabha to pacify narasimha afterwards when he started to threaten the world violently.
the shiva purana mentions: after slaying hiranyakashipu, narasimha's wrath threatened the world. at the behest of the gods, shiva sent virabhadra to tackle narasimha. when that failed, shiva manifested as sharabha.
sharabha then attacked narasimha and immobilized him. narasimha then brought forth gandaberunda.  gandaberunda fought sharabha for eighteen days, and either killed sharabha by holding it in his beak or their fight was stopped by pratyangira.
the krma pura describes the preceding battle between the purua and demonic forces in which he escapes a powerful weapon called paupta. according to soifer, it describes how prahlda's brothers headed by anuhrda and thousands of other demons "were led to the valley of death (yamalayam) by the lion produced from the body of man-lion". the same episode occurs in the matsya pura 179, several chapters after its version of the narasiha advent.


== iconography ==

narasimha is always shown with a lion face with clawed fingers fused with a human body. sometimes he is coming out of a pillar signifying that he is everywhere, in everything, in everyone. some temples such as at ahobilam, andhra pradesh, the iconography is more extensive, and includes nine other icons of narasimha:
prahladavarada: blessing prahlada
yognanda-narasiha: serene, peaceful narasimha teaching yoga
guha-narasiha: concealed narasimha
krodha-narasiha: angry narasimha
vira-narasimha: warrior narasimha
malola-narasiha or lakshmi-narasimha: with lakshmi his wife
jvala-narasiha: narasimha emitting flames of wrath
sarvatomukha-narasimha: many faced narasimha
bhishana-narasimha: ferocious narasimha
bhadra-narasimha: another fierce aspect of narasimha
mrityormrityu-narasimha: defeater of death aspect of narasimhathe earliest known iconography of narasimha is variously dated to between the 2nd and the 4th-century ce, and these have been found in uttar pradesh, madhya pradesh and andhra pradesh. most images and temples of narasimha are found in the peninsular region of india, but important ancient and medieval archeological sites containing narasimha icons are also found as vaikuntha chaturmurti in kashmir and khajuraho temples, while single face versions are found in garhwa and mathura (uttar pradesh) and in ellora caves (maharashtra). other major temples with notable icons of narasimha are found in himachal pradesh, madhya pradesh, maharashtra, odisha, andhra pradesh, tamil nadu and the vijayanagara empire ruins in karnataka. some of the oldest surviving hindu temples, such as those found in tigawa and eran (madhya pradesh), dated to early 5th-century, include narasimha along with other avatars of vishnu.


== significance ==

narasimha is a significant iconic symbol of creative resistance, hope against odds, victory over persecution, and destruction of evil. he is the destructor of not only external evil, but also one's own inner evil of "body, speech, and mind" states pratapaditya pal.in south indian art  sculptures, bronzes and paintings  viu's incarnation as narasiha is one of the most chosen themes and amongst avatras perhaps next only to rma and ka in popularity. lord narasiha also appears as one of hanuman's 5 faces, who is a significant character in the rmyaa as lord (rma's) devotee.narasimha is worshipped across telangana and andhra pradesh states in numerous forms. although, it is common that each of the temples contain depictions of narasimha in more than one form, ahobilam contains nine temples of narasimha dedicated to the nine forms of narasimha. it is also notable that the central aspect of narasimha incarnation is killing the demon hiranyakasipu, but that image of narasimha is not commonly worshipped in temples, although it is depicted.


=== coins, inscriptions and terracotta ===
the narasimha legend was influential by the 5th-century, when various gupta empire kings minted coins with his images or sponsored inscriptions that associated the ethos of narasimha with their own. the kings thus legitimized their rule as someone like narasimha who fights evil and persecution. some of the coins of the kushan era show narasimha-like images, suggesting possible influence.some of the oldest narasimha terracotta artworks have been dated to about the 2nd-century ce, such as those discovered in kausambi. a nearly complete, exquisitely carved standing narasimha statue, wearing a pancha, with personified attributes near him has been found at the mathura archeological site and is dated to the 6th-century.


=== performance arts ===
the narasimha legends have been a part of various indian classical dance repertoire. for example, kathakali theatre has included the narasimha-hiranyakasipu battle storyline, and adaptations of prahlada caritam with narasimha has been one of the popular performances in kerala. similarly, the bhagavata mela dance-drama performance arts of tamil nadu traditionally celebrate the annual narasimha jayanti festival by performing the story within regional narasimha temples.


=== prayers ===
a number of prayers have been written in dedication to narasiha avatra. these include:
the narasiha mah-mantra
narasiha prama prayer
davatra stotra by jayadeva
kmaikha aakam by vednta deika
divya prabandham 2954
sri lakshmi narasimha karavalamba stotram by adi shankaracharya


== early images ==

in andhra pradesh, a panel dating to third-fourth century ad shows a full theriomorphic squatting lion with two extra human arms behind his shoulders holding vaiava emblems. this lion, flanked by five heroes (vra), often has been identified as an early depiction of narasiha. standing cult images of narasiha from the early gupta period, survive from temples at tigowa and eran. these sculptures are two-armed, long maned, frontal, wearing only a lower garment, and with no demon-figure of hirayakaipu. images representing the narrative of narasiha slaying the demon hirayakaipu survive from slightly later gupta-period temples: one at madhia and one from a temple-doorway now set into the krma-maha at nachna, both dated to the late fifth or early sixth century a.d.an image of narasiha supposedly dating to second-third century ad sculpted at mathura was acquired by the philadelphia museum of art in 1987. it was described by stella kramrisch, the former philadelphia museum of art's indian curator, as "perhaps the earliest image of narasiha as yet known". this figure depicts a furled brow, fangs, and lolling tongue similar to later images of narasiha, but the idol's robe, simplicity, and stance set it apart. on narasiha's chest under his upper garment appears the suggestion of an amulet, which stella kramrisch associated with visnu's cognizance, the kautubha jewel. this upper garment flows over both shoulders; but below hiranyakasipu, the demon-figure placed horizontally across narasiha's body, a twisted waist-band suggests a separate garment covering the legs. the demon's hair streams behind him, cushioning his head against the man-lion's right knee. he wears a simple single strand of beads. his body seems relaxed, even pliant. his face is calm, with a slight suggestion of a smile. his eyes stare adoringly up at the face of viu. there is little tension in this figure's legs or feet, even as narasiha gently disembowels him. his innards spill along his right side. as the matsya purana describes it, narasiha ripped "apart the mighty daitya chief as a plaiter of straw mats shreds his reeds". based on the gandhara-style of robe worn by the idol, michael meiste altered the date of the image to fourth century ad.an image of narasiha, dating to the 9th century, was found on the northern slope of mount ijo, at prambanan, indonesia. images of trivikrama and varha avatras were also found at prambanan, indonesia. viu and his avatra images follow iconographic peculiarities characteristic of the art of central java. this includes physiognomy of central java, an exaggerated volume of garment, and some elaboration of the jewelry. this decorative scheme once formulated became, with very little modification, an accepted norm for sculptures throughout the central javanese period (circa 730930 a.d.). despite the iconographic peculiarities, the stylistic antecedents of the java sculptures can be traced back to indian carvings as the chalukya and pallava images of the 6th7th centuries ad.


== pilgrimage sites ==


=== in india ===
lakshmi narasimha temple, mangalagiri, andhra pradesh
vedadri narasimha temple, vedadri, andhra pradesh.
prahlad ghat, hardoi, uttar pradesh
narsing thakur temple, imphal, manipur
shri laxmi narsimha temple, maharashtra
varaha lakshmi narasimha temple, simhachalam, andhra pradesh
iskcon (hare krishna) golden temple, telangana
lakshmi narasimha temple, yadadri, telangana
narasimha temple, puri, odisha
narasimha temple, bhubaneswar, odisha
guru narasimha temple, saligrama, karnataka
narasingam yoga narasimha perumal temple, tamil nadu
narasimhaswamy temple, namakkal, tamil nadu
sri lakshmi narasimha temple, thalassery, kerala
narsinghji temple, rajasthan
narasimha swamy temple, ahobilam, andhra pradesh
sri lakshmi narasimha swamy temple - nallagondla village, vinjamur taluk, nellore district, andhra pradesh.,narasingha jharna cave temple bidar  karnataka 
narasimhapalli, navadvipa, west bengal


=== germany ===
iskcon simhachalam


== see also ==
narasinha avatar
narasimha purana
narasimha satakam
ramtek kevala narasimha temple inscription


== references ==

https://m.jagran.com/bihar/patna-city-tradition-of-holika-dahan-started-from-sikligahd-dharhara-village-of-bihar-15657472.html


== external links ==
iconography and symbolism of pacamukha narasimha, r. kalidos (1987)
the story of lord narasimha