lakshya (transl.aim) is a 2004 indian hindi-language war-drama film directed by farhan akhtar and produced by ritesh sidhwani, starring amitabh bachchan, hrithik roshan and preity zinta in the lead roles. hrithik roshan plays the role of lieutenant (later acting captain) karan shergill, who develops from an aimless young man into an army officer. it is a coming of age story set against a fictionalized backdrop of the 1999 kargil war.


== plot ==
karan shergill (hrithik roshan) is a lazy and aimless young man from delhi who has no goals for his future. his father (boman irani) is a wealthy businessman and his brother is a successful individual living in the united states. his girlfriend, romila dutta (preity zinta), also known as romi, a student activist and aspiring journalist, out of well-meaning sincerity tells him he needs to find a goal in life. when his friend parvesh announces he is going to join the indian army, karan takes the combined defence services examination as well, despite his parent's disapproval.
karan gets selected into the indian military academy, although his friend backs out. however, he's undisciplined and unused to life there. he keeps receiving punishments from the training team due to his overconfidence and lazy attitude. upset, he runs away from the academy and is forced to confront his parents' low opinion of him. his decision also causes romi to angrily break up with him for not respecting his own decision. devastated, karan finally comes to terms with his situation and makes his decision. he returns to the ima, takes his punishment, becomes a focused, disciplined officer cadet and eventually commissions into the indian army as a lieutenant. karan is posted to the 3rd battalion of the punjab regiment, commanded by col. sunil damle (amitabh bachchan). the battalion is stationed in kargil, ladakh. karan comes home on leave and is heartbroken to find out that romi is getting engaged, but his leave is cut short and he's recalled to his battalion due to an outbreak of hostilities in kargil.
he reports back to his battalion, where he is promoted to the rank of acting captain. col. damle briefs the officers on the latest situation and reveals that a number of infiltrators have crossed the line of control (loc) from pakistan and currently occupy a series of mountain peaks on the indian side of the border. the battalion has been assigned to secure point 5179, a crucial vantage point dominating the army's main supply line, the national highway 1d. the northern side of the mountain is on the pakistani side of the loc, the western side has a 1000-foot vertical rock cliff and the southern side has 3  km of empty ground with no cover. therefore, the battalion decides to attack from the eastern side of the mountain. the first part of the assault is successful. the battalion destroys the enemy's screening units with karan cited for his bravery in saving another officer's life. meanwhile, romi gets stationed to kargil as a war correspondent.
romi goes to kargil where she meets a changed karan and begins to fall in love with him again amidst the war. however, karan remains reluctant to return her feelings as hes still under the impression that shes engaged. in the second phase of the assault, the battalion attacks the peak of the mountain but fails to capture it due to the strategic advantage and heavy weaponry the pakistanis have. the unit suffers heavy casualties. brigadier puri (amrish puri) summons col. damle and gives him 48 hours to capture the peak  after that time period, responsibility for point 5179 will be given to another battalion. col. damle then orders a group of 12 officers and soldiers (including karan) to scale the 1000-foot rock cliff on the western side of the mountain and flank the enemy stronghold. they will be provided with artillery support from the eastern side. karan realises that he has finally found his goal in the form of capturing the peak. karan also learns of romis failed engagement and expresses his feelings for her. romi promises karan she will wait for him whether he returns or not.
the unit sets off on their mission and while moving through a grass field toward the rock cliff, they come under fire. the unit discovers a pakistani mortar unit in the field and destroys it, but loses their commanding officer and a number of other soldiers. the team's radios are also destroyed, so they cannot communicate with battalion hq. out of the initial 12, only 6 remain. they decide to continue with the mission. they successfully scale the cliff and attack the pakistani position during the night. their assault is successful although karan is wounded, and the team loses 3 more men. the next morning, karan limps to the peak, where he plants the indian flag and fires a flare, signaling to col. damle that they captured the peak.
the film ends with karan leaving a military hospital and reuniting with his parents and romi. romi asks him that having attained his 'lakshya' what is his next goal. to which captain shergill replies, "you", and they embrace.
the movie ends on a poignant shot of colonel sunil damle and subedar major pritam singh paying respect to martyrs of operation vijay.


== cast ==


== production ==
production of the film began in mumbai, india and it was shot at several different locations in the indian state of uttarakhand. the scenes in kargil were shot in ladakh. some parts of the film centered around hrithik's military training were also shot at the indian military academy, dehradun. actual indian army officers also participated in the shooting of the film. seeing both the actors and officers in the same getup, at times actress preity zinta would get confused separating the actual officers from the actors.


== soundtrack ==
the film's soundtrack was composed by shankar-ehsaan-loy, with lyrics by javed akhtar. shaan's "main aisa kyun hoon", picturized on hrithik, is a laid-back, funky-hip hop track. "agar main kahoon" is the love duet, picturized on hrithik-preity. the trio used harmonica for the track. the title track "lakshya" is a techno-flavored patriotic song by shankar mahadevan, which is followed by "kandhon se milte", another patriotic song with the vocals of kunal ganjawala and vijay prakash. "kitni baatein", a pathos song, is crooned by hariharan and sadhana sargam. there are two instrumentals, "victory" and "separation". the trumpet portion from "victory" has been used as the background music for their logo by excel.


=== track list ===
the soundtrack received mixed-to-positive reviews from critics. joginder tuteja of bollywood hungama in his review, said "lakshya does have good music that is very urban and will appeal to the class audience. going by the theme of the movie, the album is pretty balanced and has been composed with style that speaks of class." planet bollywood found the album to be "as good as dil chahta hai". subhash k. jha described the album as "daringly unusual sound with a show-offy kind of innovativeness". sukanya verma of rediff.com, however, remarked that, though the album was good, it was below expectations and "lacked punch". according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 11,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's thirteenth highest-selling.


== box office ==
lakshya netted around rs. 230 million at the domestic box office. lakshya grossed $5,859,242 worldwide including $753,600 from north american markets and $5,105,642 from other markets. in the u.s., it performed better, grossing $380,000 on 59 screens [approx. rs.17.5 million] in its opening weekend with the per screen average being around $6,440.


== critical reception ==
lakshya was director farhan akhtar's second film, following the success of his first film, the cult classic dil chahta hai (2001). however despite the huge hype, it didn't fare as well at the box-office. however, with repeated telecasts over the television, over the years, lakshya has been regarded as a cult film among an audience that argues it is hrithik roshan's best performance to date.


== awards ==
52nd national film awardsnational film award for best choreography  prabhu deva for "main aisa kyun hoon..."50th filmfare awards
winsbest cinematographer  christopher popp
best choreography  prabhu deva for "main aisa kyun hoon..."


=== nominations ===
best director - farhan akhtar
best actor - hrithik roshan


== references ==


== external links ==
lakshya at imdb
lakshya at rotten tomatoes
lakshya at box office mojo