lakshyam (transl. target) is a 2007 indian telugu-language action film produced by nallamalupu srinivas (bujji) and directed by srivass, starring gopichand, jagapati babu, anushka shetty and yashpal sharma in lead roles. the music was composed by mani sharma. it was later remade in tamil as maanja velu, in bengali as  fighter, and twice in bengali bangladesh as darowaner chele and  jaan kurbaan and in kannada as varadhanayaka.


== plot ==
the film starts with a flashback in hyderabad. acp bose (jagapati babu) is a sincere police officer who is happily married and lives with his parents and younger brother chandu (gopichand). chandu is a college student who falls in love with his classmate indu (anushka shetty).
enters section shankar (yashpal sharma), who is notorious for settlements and deals. he kills anyone who comes in his way and does not leave any evidence or witness behind. he takes a loan of 100 crores from a private bank with the help of a conniving dgp and a politician. the man who kills the chairman is chandu's classmate shafi (amit tiwari), who lusts for indu. he requests shankar that he needs indu as his wife. so on the day of his idol opening, he sends his goons to kidnap her. shankar's plan fails as chandu arrives at the place and fights with him and his goons. when shafi comes to meet shankar, he gives his next plan, which is to kidnap her again on the next chance. when chandu is with his brother at the police station, indu invites him to her hometown to attend her cousin's wedding. shafi, who awaited for the next chance to kidnap her, gets a chance, and shankar's goons again come to kidnap indu. unfortunately, chandu gets stabbed by a goon and sends indu with shafi. shafi takes indu to shankar's house and locks her.
bose arrests the private bank manager (surya) on an intention to know the reason behind the chairman's death. now shankar and the dig hari narayan (devraj) have no idea where bose has taken the manager. for finding the location where the manager is, shafi calls bose and informs that chandu met with an accident, for which bose replies to him to take chandu to the general hospital. when the manager was about to reveal the secret behind the chairman's death, shankar, shafi, and the dig arrive at the mortuary, kill bose and the manager, and hide bose to frame him for the murder of both the chairman and manager. at the same time, the dig reports to the media that bose had done all the misdeeds for the huge amount of money the customers invested. chandu comes to know that bose came to hospital where he is taking treatment. shankar's henchmen hides bose in a scary toy. when chandu is searching for his brother, some drops of bose's blood falls on him. this makes chandu run behind shankar's henchmen. they throw bose's body into a bus. chandu arrives there and saves his brother. but bose dies in the hands of chandu. emotional chandu who doesn't know the secret of bose's murder finds a locket in his pocket kept by bose before death. venu (venu madhav) reveals that it belongs to shafi. chandu goes to shafi's home, after beating him and learning the truth about his brother's death, chandu kills him and saves indu. shankar and dig, after seeing shafi dead, assume that bose is still alive. after watching cc footage, they kidnap chandu. but chandu escapes and kills dig. meanwhile, new dig ajay prakash (ashish vidyarthi) announces that he will catch bose and recover the money. shankar kidnaps chandu's family and asks chandu for his brother. chandu in tears reveals to his family about his brother's death. in revenge, chandu kills all henchmen of shankar and beats shankar. there arrives ajay and shankar says false words about chandu. ajay says that he worked with bose up to 4 years and in an enquiry, he comes to know that shankar killed bose and tells chandu to kill shankar. chandu kills shankar brutally and avenges his brother's death. shankar's henchman (raghu babu) becomes approver and gives back the money. ajay tells chandu that he will do all justice in the name of bose. chandu leaves the place with his family.


== cast ==


== crew ==
direction: srivass
producer: nallamalupu srinivas
music: mani sarma
cinematography: sekhar v joseph
dialogues: m ratnam
art: chinna
lyrics: chandrabose
editing: gautham raju
fights: ram-lakshman & vijay
co-screenplay writer: gopimohan
release date: 05.07.2007
banner: sri lakshminarasimha productions


== soundtrack ==
music composed by mani sharma. all songs are hit tracks. music released on aditya music company.


== box office ==
anushka's popularity increased because of her glamorous role in the movie and it was declared a super hit at the box office.


== awards ==
jagapathi babu won the nandi award for best supporting actor and filmfare award for best supporting actor  telugu for his role.
the movie also won the nandi award for best feature film- bronze


== references ==


== external links ==
lakshyam at imdb