les misrables (; french pronunciation: [le mizeabl()]), colloquially known as les mis or les miz (), is a sung-through musical adaptation of victor hugo's 1862 novel of the same name, by claude-michel schnberg (music), alain boublil and jean-marc natel (original french lyrics), and herbert kretzmer (english lyrics). the original french musical premiered in paris in 1980 with direction by robert hossein. its english-language adaptation by producer cameron mackintosh has been running in london since october 1985, making it the longest-running musical in the west end and the second longest-running musical in the world after the original off-broadway run of the fantasticks.
set in early 19th-century france, les misrables is the story of jean valjean, a french peasant, and his desire for redemption, released in 1815 after serving nineteen years in jail for stealing a loaf of bread for his sister's starving child. valjean decides to break his parole and start his life anew after a bishop inspires him with a tremendous act of mercy, but a police inspector named javert refuses to let him escape justice and pursues him for most of the play. along the way, valjean and a slew of characters are swept into the june 1832 rebellion in france, where a group of young idealists attempt to overthrow the government at a street barricade in paris.


== background ==
les misrables was originally released as a french-language concept album, and the first musical-stage adaptation of les misrables was presented at the palais des sports in 1980. however, the production closed after three months due to the expiry of the booking contract.in 1983, about six months after producer cameron mackintosh had opened cats on broadway, he received a copy of the french concept album from director peter farago. farago had been impressed by the work and asked mackintosh to produce an english-language version of the show. initially reluctant, mackintosh eventually agreed. mackintosh, in conjunction with the royal shakespeare company, assembled a production team to adapt the french musical for a british audience. after two years in development, the english-language version opened in london on 8 october 1985, by the royal shakespeare company at the barbican centre, then the london home of the rsc. the success of the west end musical led to a broadway production.


== critical reception and milestones ==

les misrables, today, has received widespread critical acclaim, and audiences have often cited it as one of the greatest musicals ever. however, this was not always the case. initially, critical reviews for les misrables were negative. at the opening of the london production, the sunday telegraph's francis king described the musical as "a lurid victorian melodrama produced with victorian lavishness" and michael ratcliffe of the observer considered the show "a witless and synthetic entertainment", while literary scholars condemned the project for converting classic literature into a musical. public opinion differed: the box office received record orders. the three-month engagement sold out, and reviews improved. the original london production ran from october 1985 to july 2019, playing over 13,000 performances and making it the second longest-running musical in the world after the fantasticks, the second longest-running west end show after the mousetrap, and the longest-running musical in the west end. on 3 october 2010, the show celebrated its 25th anniversary with three productions running in london: the original production at the queen's theatre; the 25th anniversary touring production at the barbican centre; and the 25th anniversary concert at london's o2 arena.the broadway production opened 12 march 1987 and ran until 18 may 2003, closing after 6,680 performances. at the time of its closing, it was the second-longest running musical in broadway history. as of 2019, it remains the sixth longest-running broadway show. the show was nominated for 12 tony awards, at that time a record number, of which it won eight, including best musical and best original score.
subsequently, numerous tours and international and regional productions have been staged, as well as concert and broadcast productions. several recordings have also been made. a broadway revival opened in 2006 at the broadhurst theatre and closed in 2008, and a second broadway revival opened in 2014 at the imperial theatre and closed in september 2016. the show was placed first in a bbc radio 2 listener poll of britain's "number one essential musicals" in 2005, receiving more than forty percent of the votes. a film version directed by tom hooper was released at the end of 2012 to generally positive reviews as well as numerous awards nominations, winning three academy awards, three golden globe awards and four british academy film awards (bafta).


== emblem ==

the musical's emblem is a picture of the waif cosette sweeping the thnardiers' inn (which occurs in the musical during "castle on a cloud"). it is usually cropped to a head-and-shoulders portrait, superimposed on the french flag. the image is based on an etching by gustave brion, which in turn was based on the drawing by mile bayard. bayard's drawing appeared in several of the novel's earliest french-language editions.


== synopsis ==


=== act i ===
in 1815 in france, a group of prisoners work at hard labor ("prologue: work song"). after 19 years in prison (five for stealing bread for his sister's starving son and her family, and the rest for trying to escape), jean valjean, "prisoner 24601, is released on parole by the prison guard javert. by law, valjean must display a yellow ticket of leave, which identifies him as an ex-convict ("on parole"). as a convict, valjean is shunned wherever he goes and cannot find regular work with decent wages or lodging, but the bishop of digne offers him food and shelter. desperate and embittered, valjean steals the bishop's silver, angering a farmer and other merchants as he flees. he is captured by the police, but rather than turn him in, the bishop lies and tells the police that the silver was a gift, giving valjean a pair of silver candlesticks in addition. the bishop tells valjean that he must use the silver "to become an honest man" and that he has "bought (valjean's) soul for god" ("valjean arrested, valjean forgiven"). humbled by the bishop's kindness, valjean resolves to redeem his sins ("valjean's soliloquy/what have i done?") and tears up his yellow ticket, breaking his parole but giving himself a chance to start a new life free from the stigma of his criminal past.
eight years later, in 1823, valjean has assumed a new identity as monsieur madeleine, a wealthy factory owner and mayor of montreuil-sur-mer. fantine is a single mother working in his factory, trying to support her daughter cosette, who is being raised by an innkeeper and his wife while fantine labours in the city. unbeknownst to valjean, the factory foreman lusts after fantine, and when she rejects his advances, he takes it out on the other workers, who resent her for it. one day, a coworker steals a letter about cosette from fantine, revealing to the other workers that fantine has a child. a fight breaks out, and the foreman and other workers use the incident as a pretence to fire fantine ("at the end of the day"). fantine reflects on her broken dreams and about cosette's father, who abandoned them both ("i dreamed a dream"). desperate for money, she sells her locket and hair, finally becoming a prostitute ("lovely ladies"), and attracts local sailors. when she fights back against an abusive customer, bamatabois, javert, now a police inspector stationed in montreuil-sur-mer, arrives to arrest her. valjean, passing by the scene, pities fantine, and when he realises she once worked for him and that she blames him for her misfortune, he is guilt-stricken. he orders javert to release her and takes her to a hospital ("fantine's arrest").
soon afterwards, valjean rescues a man, fauchelevent, who is pinned by a runaway cart ("the runaway cart"). javert, who has up until now not recognised valjean, though he has pursued him as a fugitive all these years, witnesses the incident and becomes suspicious, remembering the incredible strength valjean displayed in the work camp. however, it turns out a man who looks like valjean has been arrested, and is about to go to trial for breaking parole. the real valjean realises that this case of mistaken identity could free him forever, but he is not willing to see an innocent man go to prison in his place. he confesses his identity to the court ("who am i? (the trial)"). at the hospital, a delirious fantine dreams of cosette. valjean promises to find cosette and protect her ("come to me (fantine's death)"). relieved, fantine succumbs to her illness and dies. javert arrives to take valjean back into custody, but valjean asks javert for time to fetch cosette. javert refuses, insisting that a criminal like valjean can never change for the better. they struggle, but valjean overpowers javert and escapes ("the confrontation").
in montfermeil, the duplicitous innkeepers, the thnardiers, use cosette as a servant and treat her cruelly while extorting money from fantine by claiming that cosette is regularly and seriously ill, as well as demanding money to feed and clothe cosette, all the while indulging their own daughter, ponine. cosette dreams of a life with a mother where she is not forced to work and is treated lovingly ("castle on a cloud"). the thnardiers cheat their customers, stealing their possessions and setting high prices for low-quality service, and live a life of criminal depravity ("master of the house"). valjean meets cosette while she's on an errand drawing water and offers the thnardiers payment to adopt her ("the bargain"). the thnardiers feign concern for cosette, claiming that they love her like a daughter and that she is in fragile health, and bargain with valjean, who pays them 1,500 francs in the end. valjean and cosette leave for paris ("the waltz of treachery").
nine years later, in 1832, paris is in upheaval because of the impending death of general lamarque, the only man in the government who shows mercy to the poor. among those mingling in the streets are the student revolutionaries marius pontmercy and enjolras, who contemplate the effect lamarque's death will have on the poor and desperate in paris; the thnardiers, who have since lost their inn and now run a street gang which consists of thugs brujon, babet, claquesous, and montparnasse; the thnardiers daughter ponine, who is now grown and has fallen in love with marius (who is oblivious of her affections); and the streetwise young urchin gavroche, who knows everything that happens in the slums ("look down"). the thnardiers prepare to con some charitable visitors, who turn out to be valjean and cosette, who has grown into a beautiful young woman. while the gang bamboozles her father, cosette runs into marius, and the pair fall in love at first sight. thnardier suddenly recognises valjean, but before they can finish the robbery, javert, now an inspector stationed in paris, comes to the rescue ("the robbery"). valjean and cosette escape, and only later (when thnardier tips him off) does javert suspect who they were. javert makes a vow to the stars  which represent his belief in a just and ordered universe where suffering is a punishment for sin  that he will find valjean and recapture him ("stars"). meanwhile, marius persuades ponine to help him find cosette ("ponine's errand").
at a small caf, enjolras exhorts a group of idealistic students to prepare for revolution. marius interrupts the serious atmosphere by fantasising about his new-found love, much to the amusement of his compatriots, particularly the wine-loving grantaire ("the abc caf/red and black"). when gavroche brings the news of general lamarque's death, the students realise that they can use the public's dismay to incite their revolution, and that their time has come ("do you hear the people sing?"). at valjean's house, cosette thinks about her chance meeting with marius. she confronts valjean about the secrets he keeps about his and her own past ("rue plumet/in my life"). ponine leads marius to cosette's garden. he and cosette meet again and confess their mutual love, while a heartbroken ponine watches them through the garden gate and laments that marius has fallen in love with another ("a heart full of love"). thnardier and his gang arrive, intending to rob valjean's house, but ponine stops them by screaming a warning ("the attack on rue plumet"). the scream alerts valjean, who believes that the intruder was javert. he tells cosette that it's time once again for them to go on the run, and starts planning for them to flee france altogether.
on the eve of the 1832 paris uprising, valjean prepares to go into exile; cosette and marius part in despair; enjolras encourages all of paris to join the revolution; the other students prepare for battle; ponine acknowledges despairingly that marius will never love her; marius is conflicted whether to follow cosette or join the uprising; javert reveals his plans to spy on the students; and the thnardiers scheme to profit off the coming violence. marius decides to stand with his friends, and all anticipate what the dawn will bring ("one day more").


=== act ii ===

as the students build a barricade to serve as their rally point, javert, disguised as a rebel, volunteers to "spy" on the government troops. marius discovers that ponine has disguised herself as a boy to join the rebels and, wanting to keep his best friend away from the impending violence, he sends her to deliver a farewell letter to cosette. ("building the barricade (upon these stones)") valjean intercepts the letter and learns about marius and cosette's romance. ponine walks the streets of paris alone, imagining that marius is there with her, but laments that her love for marius will never be reciprocated ("on my own").
the french army arrives at the barricade and demands that the students surrender ("at the barricade"). though javert tells the students that the government will not attack that night ("javert's arrival"), gavroche recognises him and quickly exposes him as a spy, and the students detain him ("little people"). their plan is to spark a general uprising with their act of defiance, hoping that all the people of paris will side with them and overwhelm the army. ponine returns to find marius but is shot by the soldiers crossing the barricade. as marius holds her, she assures him that she feels no pain and reveals her love for him before dying in his arms ("a little fall of rain"). the students mourn this first loss of life at the barricades and resolve to fight in her name. enjolras attempts to comfort marius, who is devastated and heartbroken over the death of his best friend. valjean arrives at the barricade, crossing the government lines, disguised as a soldier ("night of anguish"), hoping that he might somehow protect marius in the coming battle for cosette's sake. the rebels are suspicious of him at first, but when the army attacks, valjean saves enjolras by shooting at a sniper and scaring him off, and they accept him as one of them. in return, he asks enjolras to allow him to be the one to execute the imprisoned javert, which enjolras grants. but as soon as valjean and javert are alone, valjean frees javert. javert warns valjean that he will not give up his pursuit and rejects what he perceives as a bargain for valjean's freedom. valjean says there are no conditions to his release, and holds no grudges toward javert for doing his duty ("the first attack").
the students settle down for the night and reminisce about the past while also expressing anxiety about the battle to come. enjolras tells the other students to stay awake in case the enemy strikes unexpectedly in the night, but he tells marius to get some sleep, knowing marius is still much too devastated over losing ponine to stay awake. grantaire gets angry and asks the students if they fear to die. marius wonders if cosette will remember him if he does ("drink with me"). as marius sleeps, valjean prays to god to protect marius, even if the cost for marius' safety is his own life ("bring him home"). as dawn approaches, enjolras realises that the people of paris have not risen up with them, but resolves to fight on in spite of the impossible odds ("dawn of anguish"). their resolve is fired even further when the army kills gavroche, who snuck out to collect ammunition from bodies on the other side of the barricade ("the second attack (death of gavroche)"). the army gives a final warning, but the rebels fight to the last man with enjolras exhorting "let others rise to take our place, until the earth is free!". everyone at the barricade is killed except valjean and a gravely wounded marius, who escape into the sewers ("the final battle"). javert returns to the barricade, searching for valjean amongst the bodies, and finds the open sewer grating.
valjean carries marius through the sewers but collapses in exhaustion. while he is unconscious, thnardier, who has been looting bodies, comes upon them and takes a ring from the unconscious marius, but flees when valjean (whom he again recognises) regains consciousness ("dog eats dog"). when valjean carries marius to the sewer's exit, he finds javert waiting for him. valjean begs javert for one hour to bring marius to a doctor, and javert reluctantly agrees. javert finds himself unable to reconcile valjean's merciful acts with his conception of valjean as an irredeemable criminal. refusing to compromise his principles but no longer able to hold them sacred, he finds himself torn between his beliefs about god and his desire to adhere to the law. he is unable to reconcile and commits suicide by throwing himself into the seine ("javert's suicide").
in the wake of the failed revolution, women mourn the deaths of the students ("turning"). marius, wounded but alive, despairs at the death of his friends and sees that their sacrifice was for nothing ("empty chairs at empty tables"). as he wonders who saved his own life, cosette comforts him, and they reaffirm their blossoming romance. valjean realises that cosette will not need him as a caretaker once she's married and gives them his blessing ("every day"). valjean confesses to marius that he is an escaped convict and must go away because his presence endangers cosette ("valjean's confession"), making marius promise never to tell cosette. a few months later, marius and cosette marry ("wedding chorale"). the thnardiers  crash the reception disguised as nobility and attempt to blackmail marius, telling him that valjean is a murderer and that thnardier saw him carrying a corpse in the sewers after the barricades fell. when thnardier shows him the ring he stole as proof, marius realises that it was valjean who saved his life. the newlyweds leave to find valjean (in some productions, marius pauses to give thnardier a punch in the face). the thnardiers are not discouraged, instead gloating that their craven practicality has saved their lives time and time again ("beggars at the feast").
at a convent, valjean awaits his death, having nothing left to live for. the spirit of fantine appears to him and tells him that he has been forgiven and will soon be with god. cosette and marius arrive to find valjean near death. valjean thanks god for letting him live long enough to see cosette again, and marius thanks him for saving his life ("valjean's death"). valjean gives cosette a letter confessing his troubled past and the truth about her mother. as he dies, the spirits of fantine and ponine guide him to heaven reminding him that "to love another person is to see the face of god". they are joined by the spirits of those who died at the barricades, who sing that in the next world, god lays low all tyranny and frees all oppressed people from their shackles ("do you hear the people sing? (reprise/finale)").


== musical numbers ==


== instrumentation ==
the standard orchestration for the 2009 u.k. tour of les misrables consisted of:


== characters ==


=== casts ===


==== original casts ====


==== notable replacements ====
west end (1985-)jean valjean:  john owen-jones, simon bowman, drew sarich, alfie boe, ramin karimloo, peter lockyer, simon gleeson, killian donnelly, jon robyns
javert: clive carter, philip quast, david burt, michael mccarthy, jrme pradon, earl carpenter, norm lewis, hadley fraser, hayden tee, david thaxton, michael ball
fantine: ruthie henshall, madalena alberto, sierra boggess, rachelle ann go, carley stenson, carrie hope fletcher, lucie jones
thnardier: peter polycarpou, barry james, martin ball, stephen tate, matt lucas
mme. thnardier: jenny galloway, gay soper, josefina gabrielle
cosette: celia graham, katie hall, gina beck, lucie jones
marius: simon bowman, glenn carter, hadley fraser, hayden tee, jon robyns, alistair brammer, gareth gates, nick jonas
ponine: meredith braun, lea salonga, samantha barks, alexia khadime, danielle hope, carrie hope fletcher, eva noblezada
enjolras: john owen-jones, ramin karimloo, oliver thornton, jon robyns, david thaxton, killian donnellybroadway (1987-2003)jean valjean: gary morris
javert: anthony crivello, robert westenberg, chuck wagner, gregg edelman, shuler hensley, terrence mann, michael mccarthy
fantine: maureen moore, debbie shapiro gravitte, melba moore, alice ripley, jacquelyn piro donovan, rachel york, lauren kennedy
thnardier: ed dixon, nick wyman
cosette: jacquelyn piro donovan, sarah litzsinger
marius: hugh panaro, ricky martin, peter lockyer, chris diamantopoulos, kevin kern
ponine: catherine brunell, lea salonga, diana kaarina
gavroche: nick jonasbroadway revival (2006-2008)jean valjean: drew sarich, john owen-jones
javert: drew sarich
fantine: lea salonga, judy kuhn
thnardier: chip zien, gary beach
mme. thnardier: ann harada
ponine: mandy bruno, megan mcginnis
enjolras: max von essenbroadway revival (2014-2016)jean valjean: alfie boe, john owen-jones
javert: earl carpenter, hayden tee
fantine: erika henningsen, montego glover
thnardier: gavin lee
marius: chris mccarrell


==== concert casts ====


==== additional ====
jean valjean:  michael ball
javert: robert cuccioli, davis gaines, brian stokes mitchell
fantine: melora hardin
thnardier: ken page
cosette: sierra boggess, erika henningsen
ponine: sutton foster, lea michele
enjolras: alistair brammer, anthony warlow


== productions ==


=== sit-down productions ===


==== original french production ====

alain boublil's initial idea to adapt victor hugo's novel into a musical came while at a performance of the musical oliver! in london: 

as soon as the artful dodger came onstage, gavroche came to mind. it was like a blow to the solar plexus. i started seeing all the characters of victor hugo's les misrablesvaljean, javert, gavroche, cosette, marius, and poninein my mind's eye, laughing, crying, and singing onstage.
he shared the idea with french composer claude-michel schnberg, and the two developed a rough synopsis and analysis of each character's mental and emotional state, as well as that of an audience. schnberg then began work on the music, while boublil the text. according to boublil, "i could begin work on the words. this i didafter myself deciding on the subject and title of every songin collaboration with my friend, poet jean-marc natel." two years later, a two-hour demo tape of schnberg accompanying himself on the piano and singing every role was completed. an album of this collaboration was recorded at cts studios in wembley and was released in 1980, selling 260,000 copies.the concept album includes maurice barrier as jean valjean, jacques mercier as javert, rose laurens as fantine, yvan dautin as thnardier, marie-france roussel as mme. thnardier, richard dewitte as marius, fabienne guyon as cosette, marie-france dufour as ponine, michel sardou as enjolras, fabrice bernard as gavroche, maryse cdolin as young cosette, claude-michel schnberg as courfeyrac, salvatore adamo as combeferre, michel delpech as feuilly, dominique tirmont as m. gillenormand, and mireille as the hair buyer.
that year, in september 1980, a stage version directed by veteran french film director robert hossein was produced at the palais des sports in paris. the show was a success, with 100 performances seen by over 500,000 people.most of the cast from the concept album performed in the production. the cast included maurice barrier as valjean, jean valle as javert, rose laurens as fantine, maryse cdolin and sylvie camacho and priscilla patron as young cosette, marie-france roussel as mme. thnardier, yvan dautin as m. thnardier, florence davis and fabrice ploquin and cyrille dupont as gavroche, marianne mille as ponine, gilles buhlmann as marius, christian ratellin as enjolras, fabienne guyon as cosette, ren-louis baron as combeferre, dominique tirmont as m. gillenormand, anne forrez as mlle. gillenormand, and claude reva as the storyteller.


==== original london production ====

the english-language version, with lyrics by herbert kretzmer and additional material by james fenton, was substantially expanded and reworked from a literal translation by siobhan bracke of the original paris version, in particular adding a prologue to tell jean valjean's background story. kretzmer's lyrics are not a direct translation of the french, a term that kretzmer refused to use. a third of the english lyrics were a rough translation, another third were adapted from the french lyrics and the final third consisted of new material. the majority is performed in recitative style; the vocalists use natural speech, not musical metrics.the first production in english, produced by cameron mackintosh and adapted and directed by trevor nunn and john caird, played to preview performances beginning on 28 september 1985 and formally opened on 8 october 1985 at the barbican centre, london. it was billed in the programme as "the royal shakespeare company presentation of the rsc/cameron mackintosh production".
the set was designed by john napier, costumes by andreane neofitou and lighting by david hersey. musical supervision and orchestrations were by john cameron, who had been involved with the show since boublil and schnberg hired him to orchestrate the original french concept album. musical staging was by kate flatt with musical direction by martin koch.
the original london cast included colm wilkinson as jean valjean, roger allam as javert, ken caswell as the bishop of digne, patti lupone as fantine, zo hart, justine mcintyre, jayne o'mahony and joanne woodcock as young cosette, danielle akers, ian calvin as babet, fauchlevet,and a constable, gillian brander and juliette caton as young ponine, susan jane tanner as madame thnardier, alun armstrong as thnardier, frances ruffelle as ponine, rebecca caine as cosette, michael ball as marius, david burt as enjolras, with ian tucker, oliver spencer and liza hayden sharing the role of gavroche.on 4 december 1985, the show transferred to the palace theatre, london and moved again on 3 april 2004, to the smaller queens theatre, now called the sondheim theatre, with some revisions of staging.the show celebrated its ten-thousandth performance on 5 january 2010 and its 30th anniversary in october 2015.
the co-production has generated valuable income for the royal shakespeare company.the original show closed at the queen's theatre on 13 july 2019 to allow for theatre refurbishments, after which a staged concert was performed at the adjacent gielgud theatre for a four-month run before it returned to the sondheim theatre.the newly updated staging developed for the 25th anniversary touring production opened at the newly renamed sondheim theatre on 18 december 2019 in previews with opening night set for 16 january 2020. the new production is co-directed by james powell and laurence connor with set and image design by matt kinley, lighting by paule constable, sound by mick potter and costumes by andreane neofitou and christine rowlands. the first cast for this new version included jon robyns (valjean), bradley jaden (javert), carrie hope fletcher (fantine), shan ako (ponine), lily kerhoas (cosette), harry apps (marius), gerard carey (thnardier), josefina gabrielle (madame thnardier) and ashley gilmour (enjolras).the show was forced to close temporarily from march 16, 2020 as a result of the covid-19 pandemic. it was announced in june 2020 that it would not reopen until 2021. it is currently scheduled to reopen on 25 september 2021.


==== original broadway production ====
the musical opened as a pre-broadway tryout at the kennedy center's opera house in washington, d.c. on 27 december 1986. it ran for eight weeks through 14 february 1987.the musical then premiered on broadway on 12 march 1987 at the broadway theatre. colm wilkinson and frances ruffelle reprised their roles from the london production. the $4.5 million production had a more than $4 million advance sale prior to its new york opening.the show underwent further tightening, namely with improved sewer lighting and the incorporation of the javert suicide scene effect. a new york times report consisted of the following: "the transfer from london to the united states has prompted further modifications. 'we are taking this opportunity to rethink and perfect, to rewrite some details which probably no one else will see, but which for us are still long nights of work,' mr. boublil says. 'there are things that nobody had time to do in london, and here we have a wonderful opportunity to fix a few things. no one will notice, perhaps, but for us, it will make us so happy if we can better this show. we would like this to be the final version.'" two songs were deletedthe complete version of gavroche's song "little people" and the adult cosette's "i saw him once". a short section at the beginning of "in my life" replaced "i saw him once". the lyrics in javert's "stars" were changed. it now ended with the line, "this i swear by the stars!", while the london production and cast recording ended with the repeated line, "keeping watch in the night".
the original broadway cast included colm wilkinson as jean valjean, david bryant as marius, judy kuhn as cosette, michael maguire as enjolras, frances ruffelle as ponine, braden danner as gavroche, donna vivino as young cosette, jennifer butt as madame thnardier, leo burmester as thnardier, randy graff as fantine, terrence mann as javert, and chrissie mcdonald as young ponine.other members of the original broadway cast included kevin marcum (brujon), paul harman (combeferre/foreman), anthony crivello (grantaire/bamatabois), john dewar (joly), joseph kolinski (feuilly), alex santoriello (montparnasse/labourer), jesse corti (courfeyrac/farmer), susan goodman (old woman/innkeeper's wife), john norman (prouvaire/pimp), norman large (bishop/lesgles), marcus lovett (babet/constable), steve shocket (claquesous/fauchevelant/constable/pimp), cindy benson (old woman), marcie shaw, jane bodle, joanna glushak, ann crumb (factory girl), kelli james, and gretchen kingsley-weihe. michael hinton was the original drummer and credited on the cast album.the musical ran at the broadway theatre through 10 october 1990, when it moved to the imperial theatre. it was scheduled to close on 15 march 2003, but the closing was postponed by a surge in public interest. according to an article in the scotsman, "sales picked up last october, when sir cameron made the announcement that the show would be closing on march 15th... its closure postponed to may 18th because of an unexpected increase in business." after 6,680 performances in sixteen years, when it closed on 18 may 2003, it was the second-longest-running broadway musical after cats. it was surpassed by the phantom of the opera in 2006.this broadway production of les misrables and its advertising in new york city is a recurring theme in american psycho. the reviewer for the financial times wrote that les misrables is "the book's hilarious main cultural compass-point".


==== 2006 broadway revival ====
only three years after the original run closed, les misrables began a return to broadway on 9 november 2006 at the broadhurst theatre for a limited run that was subsequently made open-ended.
using the set, costumes, performers, and other resources from the recently finished third us national touring production, the production was only slightly altered. minor changes included colourful projections blended into its existing lighting design, and a proscenium that extended out into the first two boxes on either side of the stage.
some cuts made to the show's prologue during its original broadway run were restored, lyrics for gavroche's death scene (known in the revival as "ten little bullets") cut during the development of the original london production were restored, and much of the show was re-orchestrated by christopher jahnke, introducing a snare and timpani-heavy sound played by a 14-member band, a reduction of about 8 musicians from the original production's 22 musician orchestration.the original 2006 broadway revival cast included alexander gemignani as jean valjean, norm lewis as javert, daphne rubin-vega as fantine, celia keenan-bolger as ponine, aaron lazar as enjolras, adam jacobs as marius, ali ewoldt as cosette, gary beach as thnardier, jenny galloway as madame thnardier, brian daddario, jacob levine, skye rainforth and austyn myers as gavroche, and tess adams, kylie liya goldstein and carly rose sonenclar as young cosette/young ponine. the ensemble consisted of becca ayers, daniel bogart (combeferre/bamatabois), justin bohon (joly/major domo), kate chapman, nikki renee daniels, karen elliott (old woman/innkeeper's wife), blake ginther (feuilly), j.d. goldblatt (montparnasse/pimp/labourer), marya grandy(crone), victor hawks (brujon), robert hunt (courfeyrac/foreman), nehal joshi (lesgles/constable), jeff kready (babet/constable/fauchevelant), doug kreeger (jean prouvaire/farmer), james chip leanord (bishop/claquesous), megan mcginnis, drew sarich (grantaire/innkeeper), haviland stillwell (factory girl), and idara victor.lea salonga, who previously played the role of ponine in the 10th anniversary concert, replaced rubin-vega as fantine beginning on 2 march 2007. zach rand replaced jacob levine as gavroche on 15 march 2007. ann harada replaced jenny galloway as mme. thnardier on 24 april 2007. ben davis joined playing javert, and max von essen playing enjolras. ben crawford and mandy bruno joined the cast that day too, playing brujon and ponine respectively. on 23 july 2007, sarich took over the role of valjean, following gemignani's departure. on 5 september 2007, it was announced that john owen-jones (who was playing valjean in london) was to join the broadway cast. in return, sarich would join the london cast in owen-jones' place. judy kuhn, who originated the role of cosette, returned to the show after twenty years as fantine, succeeding salonga.
the revival closed on 6 january 2008 after 17 previews and 463 performances.


==== 2013 toronto revival ====
a sit down production played at the princess of wales theatre in toronto, canada based on the 25th anniversary touring production. previews began on 27 september 2013 with the opening night on 9 october. the production closed on 2 february 2014. co-directed by lawrence connor and james powell, laurence olivier award nominee ramin karimloo starred as jean valjean; colm wilkinson, who originated the role, portrayed the bishop of digne in a one-day performance symbolic handing of the torch to karimloo. he was joined by fellow west end star, earl carpenter, who reprised the role of inspector javert. other cast members included genevieve leclerc as fantine, samantha hill as cosette, melissa o'neil as ponine, perry sherman as marius, cliff saunders as monsieur thnardier, lisa horner as madame thnardier, and mark uhre as enjolras. the roles of young cosette and young ponine were shared by ella ballentine, saara chaudry and madison oldroyd. gavroche was shared by david gregory black and aiden glennread.


==== 2014 broadway revival ====
the show returned to broadway in march 2014 at the imperial theatre with previews beginning 1 march 2014 and had an official opening on 23 march 2014. the creative team included the direction of laurence connor and james powell, set design by matt kinley, costumes by andreane neofitou and christine rowlands, lighting by paule constable, sound by mick potter and projections by fifty-nine productions. cameron mackintosh once again produced the show. on 22 october 2013, it was announced that ramin karimloo, will swenson, caissie levy, and nikki m. james would be headlining the revival cast as jean valjean, javert, fantine, and ponine respectively. andy mientus and samantha hill also starred as marius and cosette respectively. angeli negron and mckayla twiggs share the role of young cosette. on 30 august 2015, karimloo ended his run of the show and was replaced by alfie boe. after boe's final performance on 28 february, the role of valjean was played by john owen-jones beginning 1 march 2016 until the production closed on 4 september 2016, after 1,026 performances over two-and-a-half years. the revival recouped its entire initial investment and grossed $109 million.the 2014 broadway revival was nominated for 3 tony awards: best revival of a musical, best leading actor in a musical for karimloo, and best sound design for potter.


=== touring productions ===


==== us national tours ====
the show had three national touring companies of the original broadway production in the us, all of which shared the broadway producer and manager, creative teams, as well nearly identical sets, costumes, and lighting. while the touring production and the new york production were running simultaneously, the staff, cast members, crew, and musicians of the two productions interchanged often, which contributed to keeping both companies of the show in form. when the new york production closed in 2003, the third national tour continued for another three years, and enjoyed the influx of many members from the original and subsequent new york companies.
the first national tour opened at boston's shubert theatre on 12 december 1987, and continued to play major cities until late 1991. the second national tour (called "the fantine company") opened at los angeles' shubert theatre on 1 june 1988. the production played for fourteen months then transferred to san francisco's curran theatre where it enjoyed a similar run. the third national tour of les misrables (called "the marius company") was one of the longest running american touring musical productions. opening on 28 november 1988, at the tampa bay performing arts center in florida, and closing on 23 july 2006, at the fox theatre in st. louis, missouri, the tour ran for seventeen years and 7,061 performances. the tour played in 145 cities in 43 states. the same touring company also frequently performed in canada, made a 1994 diversion to singapore, and another diversion in 2002 to be the first western musical production to visit china, opening in shanghai's grand theatre for a three-week engagement.
all us productions (including broadway and its revival) were visually identical in scale and design but the third national tour was notable for its portability without sacrificing the broadway-caliber experience. thanks to innovative touring techniques borrowed from the pop/rock concert industry, the 4.5 million dollar production was adaptable to smaller and larger venues and traveled complete in all of 8 semi tractor trailers. it was set up and ready to go in less than 24 hours and broken down and packed up in about 16 hours. this allowed it to reach many cities and venues in its acclaimed, original broadway form.
a new national tour began on 21 september 2017 at the providence performing arts centre (ppac). it starred nick cartell as valjean, josh davis as javert, melissa mitchell as fantine, j. anthony crane as thnardier, allison guinn as madame thnardier, joshua grosso as marius, phoenix best as ponine, matt shingledecker as enjolras and jillian butler as cosette. the roles of young cosette and ponine were shared by zoe glick and sophie knapp, while the role of gavroche was shared by jordan cole and julian lerner. it uses much of the staging and technical work of the 2014 broadway revival.


==== uk and ireland tours ====


===== 19921993 tour =====
the first tour of the uk and ireland opened at the palace theatre, manchester 14 april 1992 with jeff leyton (jean valjean), philip quast (javert, later replaced by michael mccarthy) ria jones (fantine), meredith braun (ponine), mike sterling (marius, later replaced by richard burman), tony timberlake (thnardier), louise plowright (mdme thnardier), sarah ryan (cosette) and daniel coll (enjolras). the production then moved on to the point theatre, dublin, ireland, opening 30 june 1993, and then to playhouse, edinburgh, scotland, opening 23 september 1993.


===== 19972000 tour =====
in 1997 a second tour began at the theatre royal, plymouth, running from 6 may until 14 june, the cast featured: stig rossen (jean valjean), michael mccarthy (javert), julia worsley (fantine), gemma sandy (ponine), norman bowman (marius), cameron blakely (thnardier), cathy breeze (mdme thnardier), rebecca vere (cosette) and mark o'malley (enjolras). the tour then continued as detailed in the table below:


==== 25th anniversary tour ====
a tour to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the show began performances on 12 december 2009, at the wales millennium centre in cardiff. differences from the original production included a new set, new costumes, new direction and alterations to the original orchestrations. the tour also did not use a revolving stage and the scenery was inspired by the paintings of victor hugo. locations have included manchester, norwich, birmingham, and edinburgh. the tour also played a special engagement in paris. from september through october, the show returned to the barbican centre, london, site of the original 1985 production. the tour cast featured john owen-jones as valjean, earl carpenter as javert, gareth gates as marius, ashley artus as thnardier, lynne wilmot as madame thnardier, madalena alberto as fantine, rosalind james as ponine, jon robyns as enjolras, katie hall as cosette (with samara clarke as young cosette), and david lawrence as the bishop of digne. the tour ended 2 october 2010, at the barbican.in the fall of 2010, the tour moved to the us with a new company presented by broadway across america to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the show opening on broadway. the tour had its opening on 19 november 2010 at the paper mill playhouse in millburn, new jersey, running until 19 december 2010. this tour originally starred lawrence clayton as valjean, andrew varela as javert, betsy morgan as fantine, jenny latimer as cosette, justin scott brown as marius, chasten harmon as ponine, michael kostroff as thnardier, shawna hamic as madame thnardier, jeremy hays as enjolras, josh caggiano and ethan paul khusidman as gavroche, maya jade frank and juliana simone alternating as young cosette and young ponine. j. mark mcvey's daughter, kylie mcvey was the understudy for young cosette and young ponine. clayton left the tour in april 2011. ron sharpe later took over as valjean until june 2011. j. mark mcvey was then valjean (mcvey previously played the role on broadway), but mcvey and his daughter left the tour on 1 april 2012. peter lockyer replaces him as valjean. betsy morgan left the tour on 2 december 2012. she was replaced by genevieve leclerc. the tour ran until 11 august 2013, closing at the smith center for the performing arts in las vegas. the tour's final cast included peter lockyer as valjean, andrew varela as javert, genevieve leclerc as fantine, lauren wiley as cosette, devin ilaw as marius, briana carlson-goodman as ponine, timothy gulan as thnardier, shawna hamic as madame thnardier, jason forbach as enjolras, ava della pietra and erin cearlock alternating as little cosette and young eponine, with mia sinclair jenness as little girl, in 2011 it was reported that the tour is one of six us national broadway tours that are grossing over $1,000,000 per week.


===== 20182020 tour =====
a new uk and ireland tour (similar to the 25th anniversary production) began at curve, leicester from 3 to 24 november 2018, before touring to the bord gis energy theatre, dublin (5 december to 12 january 2019), edinburgh festival theatre (22 january to 16 february 2019), palace theatre, manchester (19 february to 30 march 2019), birmingham hippodrome (2 april to 11 may 2019), milton keynes theatre (14 may to 8 june 2019), theatre royal, plymouth (11 june to 6 july 2019), the alhambra theatre, bradford (9 july to 10 august 2019), newcastle theatre royal (15 august to 5 october 2019), liverpool empire (9 to 26 october 2019), mayflower theatre, southampton (29 october to 23 november 2019) and wales millenium centre (26 november 2019 to 4 january 2020). the tour then leaves the uk to play a special engagement in zrich, switzerland (21 january to 23 february 2020) before visiting norwich theatre royal (4 march to 4 april 2020), bristol hippodrome (7 april to 9 may 2020), the lowry, salford (12 to 30 may 2020), glasgow theatre royal (3 to 27 june 2020), birmingham hippodrome (30 june to 18 july 2020), leeds grand theatre (23 july to 15 august 2020), bord gis energy theatre, dublin (25 august to 13 september 2020), marlowe theatre, canterbury (25 september to 24 october 2020) and finally hull new theatre (28 october to 21 november 2020).
the cast featured killian donnelly (jean valjean), nic greenshields (javert), katie hall (fantine), tegan bannister (ponine), bronwen hanson (cosette), harry apps (marius), martin ball (thnardier), sophie-louise dann (madame thnardier) and will richardson (enjolras).the cast for the tour's second year featured dean chisnall (jean valjean), nic greenshields (javert), katie hall (fantine), frances mayli mccann (ponine), charlie burn (cosette), felix mosse (marius), ian hughes (thnardier), helen walsh (madame thnardier) and barnaby hughes (enjolras).


==== 2014 australian tour ====
in mid 2013, a brand new australian tour was announced, with simon gleeson as valjean, hayden tee as javert, patrice tipoki as fantine, trevor ashley and lara mulcahy as the thnardiers, kerrie anne greenland as ponine, emily langridge as cosette, euan doidge as marius and chris durling as enjolras and nicholas cradock as gavroche. the production premiered on 4 july at her majesty's theatre, melbourne. additional stops for the australian tour included the crown theatre in perth, the capitol theatre in sydney, and the lyric theatre qpac in brisbane. the australian revival production transferred to manila, philippines in march 2016, becoming an international tour.


==== 2016 international tour ====
on 16 september 2015, it was announced that the australian tour would launch its international tour in manila, philippines at the theatre at solaire from march 2016 until 1 may 2016, and proceeded to the esplanade theatre in singapore from may 2016. it then had its gcc premiere at the dubai opera in dubai, united arab emirates from november 2016.the manila and singapore productions featured simon gleeson as valjean, earl carpenter as javert, helen walsh as madame thnardier, cameron blakely as thnardier, kerrie anne greenland as ponine, emily langridge as cosette, chris durling as enjolras, and paul wilkins as marius. rachelle ann go played the role of fantine in the manila production, and patrice tipoki returned the role in the singapore production after her stint in the original london production. the dubai production features john owen-jones as valjean, hayden tee as javert, patrice tipoki as fantine, peter polycarpou as thnardier, jodie prenger as madame thnardier, carrie hope fletcher as ponine, alistair brammer as enjolras, emily langridge as cosette, and paul wilkins as marius.


== concert productions ==


=== 10th anniversary concert ===

on 8 october 1995, the show celebrated the tenth anniversary of the west end production with a concert at the royal albert hall. this 10th anniversary concert was nearly "complete", missing only a handful of scenes, including "the death of gavroche", "the robbery" and the confrontation between marius and the thnardiers at the wedding feast. sir cameron mackintosh hand-selected the cast, which became known as the les misrables dream cast, assembled from around the world, and engaged the royal philharmonic orchestra. the concert concluded with seventeen valjeans from various international productions singing, "do you hear the people sing?" in their native languages. the concert cast included colm wilkinson as jean valjean, philip quast as javert, paul monaghan as the bishop of digne, ruthie henshall as fantine, hannah chick as young cosette, jenny galloway as madame thnardier, alun armstrong as thnardier, adam searles as gavroche, michael maguire as enjolras, michael ball as marius, judy kuhn as cosette, lea salonga as ponine, and anthony crivello as grantaire. the concert was staged by ken caswell and conducted by david charles abell.


=== 25th anniversary concert ===

the 25th anniversary concert of the west end production was held at the o2 in north greenwich, south east london, united kingdom, on sunday, 3 october 2010 at 1:30 pm and 7:00 pm.
it featured alfie boe as jean valjean, norm lewis as javert, lea salonga as fantine, nick jonas as marius, katie hall as cosette (in place of camilla kerslake, who was unable to attend), jenny galloway as madame thnardier, ramin karimloo as enjolras, samantha barks as ponine, matt lucas as thnardier, mia jenkins as young cosette, robert madge as gavroche and earl carpenter as the bishop of digne. casts of the current london, international tour, original 1985 london, and several school productions took part, comprising an ensemble of three hundred performers and musicians. the concert was directed by laurence connor & james powell and conducted by david charles abell.


=== the all-star staged concert ===

from 10 august to 2 december 2019, the musical was performed as a staged concert version at the gielgud theatre in the west end during the refurbishment of the adjacent sondheim theatre (where the original london production had been running and will be home to the new production from december 2019).
featuring a cast and orchestra of over 65, the 16-week concert run starred michael ball as javert, alfie boe as jean valjean, carrie hope fletcher as fantine and matt lucas as thnardier. katy secombe also starred as madame thnardier and john owen-jones played jean valjean for some performances during the run. furthers leads included rob houchen (marius), bradley jaden (enjolras), shan ako (eponine) and lily kerhoas (cosette). earl carpenter also played the dual role of the bishop/bamatabois, while understudying javert.
the final concert was filmed and broadcast live to cinemas on 2 december and has since been released on home video and album and a tour is planned.in october 2020, on the final of britain's got talent, it was confirmed that the stage concert would return for a limited 6 week run at the sondheim theatre from 5 december 2020 to 17 january 2021. it was subsequently extended twice and was due to play until 28 february 2021. due to the covid-19 pandemic audience will be socially distant and capacity will be limited to 50%. due to local covid restrictions the show was suspended from 16 december 2020 after just 10 performances in which boe had performed the role of jean valjean on 8 occasions and owen-jones on 2 occasions. it is scheduled to reopen on 20 may 2021 and run until 5 september. ball, boe, fletcher, lucas and owen-jones are not set to reprise their roles.


=== other concert performances ===
the musical has also been performed in concert at cardiff castle and several venues in southern england, produced by earl carpenter concerts. a concert version starring jeff leyton was also performed at the odyssey arena, belfast. in 1989, a one-night concert performance was performed at skydome, toronto, and the largest concert production attracted an audience of approximately 125,000 as part of the australia day celebrations in sydney's domain park. the scandinavian concert tour, produced by cameron mackintosh in association with noble art, starred danish musical icon stig rossen in the leading role and commemorated author victor hugo's 200th birthday. venues on the tour included the stockholm globe arena, oslo spektrum, the helsinki hartwell areena, and the gothenburg scandinavium, with audiences totalling over 150,000 for the complete tour.
in november 2004, to celebrate the centennial of the entente cordiale, the queen invited the cast of les misrables in the west end to perform for french president jacques chirac at windsor castle. it was the first time the cast of a west end musical had performed at a royal residence. the cast was the same as in the west end, supplemented by several guest singers and a choir of former performers. the part of jean valjean was played by michael ball  the original 1985 london and 1995 dream cast marius  and the part of javert was played by michael mccarthy.
in february 2008, les misrables was performed at the bournemouth international centre, england with a cast of west end stars accompanied by the bournemouth symphony orchestra. in august 2008, a concert version, directed by richard jay-alexander, was performed at the hollywood bowl. the cast included veteran les misrables star j. mark mcvey as valjean, the office star melora hardin as fantine, broadway star and bowl veteran brian stokes mitchell as javert, spring awakening and glee star lea michele as ponine, tony-winning jersey boys star john lloyd young as marius, west end star tom lowe as enjolras, michael mccormick as thnardier, ruth williamson as madame thnardier, michele maika as cosette, maddie levy as young cosette, and sage ryan as gavroche.
in september 2008, it was performed at the st john loveridge hall in guernsey with a cast of west end performersthe first time that it had been professionally performed on the island where victor hugo wrote the novel. former london valjean phil cavill reprised his role alongside les misrables veteran michael mccarthy as javert. in march 2009, the guernsey production was remounted at fort regent in jersey; and in july 2009, the musical was performed in concert at osborne house on the isle of wight.


== international productions ==
the show has been produced in forty-two countries and translated into twenty-one languages: english, french (re-translated from the english version),  german (austria and germany), spanish (six versions: two from spain, two from mexico, one from argentina, and one from venezuela), japanese, hebrew, hungarian, icelandic, norwegian (bokml and nynorsk), polish, swedish (in sweden and in finland), dutch (netherlands and belgium), danish, finnish, brazilian portuguese, estonian, czech, mauritian creole, basque, catalan and korean. including singles and promos, there have been over seventy official recordings from worldwide productions.the first full west end / broadway production in europe (mainland) was set up in oslo, norway at det norske teatret and opened on 17 march 1988. the production was in norwegian and starred norwegian singer/actor ystein wiik as jean valjean, paul ge johannessen as javert, ivind blunck as thnardier, kari gjrum as fantine, amund enger as enjolras and guri schanke as ponine. the first oslo production was hugely successful and some 10% of norway's entire population saw the show in the first 6 months. ystein wiik went on to also star as jean valjean in the productions in vienna and london in 19891990.
the stage show, which had changed so significantly since its parisian conception as a stadium concert in 1980, was translated back into the language of victor hugo for its french world premire in montreal, quebec, canada, in 1991. this production had a cast that presented five shows a week in french and three a week in english.


== north american productions ==
in september 2008, a mini-tour produced by atlanta's theater of the stars played eisenhower hall at the united states military academy, in west point, new york; the filene center at the wolf trap national park for the performing arts in vienna, virginia; kansas city starlight theatre; and the fox theater in atlanta. the show featured a new set of original pictures painted by victor hugo himself. robert evan played valjean, returning to the role he played in the mid-nineties on broadway. also featured were nikki rene daniels as fantine and robert hunt as javert, both reprising their roles from the broadway revival. fred hanson directed the production. the creative team included matt kinley as scenic designer, ken billington as lighting designer, peter fitzgerald and erich bechtel as sound designers, zachary borovay as projection designer, and dan riddle as musical director and conductor.in 2008, the signature theatre in arlington, virginia staged a small venue "black box" version of the play. signature received mackintosh's special permission for the production: "one of the great pleasures of being involved with the creation of les misrables is seeing this marvelous musical being done in a completely different and original way. having seen many shows brilliantly reimagined at signature i have no doubt that eric and his team will come up with a revolutionary new take on les miz unlike anything anyone has seen before. viva la diffrence!" the production officially opened on 14 december 2008 (after previews from 2 december), and ran through 22 february 2009 (extended from 25 january 2009).a 2014 production at the dallas theater center modernized the staging in a way rarely attempted in productions of this play, set visually in the modern-day united states rather than 1830s france. the concept was thought to be refreshing as a change from typical production styles and effective as a commentary on modern inequality. though, much controversy surrounded their unauthorized depart from the authors' libretto and score.in panama, les misrables was staged in 2014 in spanish at the famed national theatre of panama for a short, sold-out run, directed by aaron zebede.


=== school edition ===
the school edition cuts a considerable amount of material from the original show. it is divided into thirty scenes and, although no critical scenes or songs have been removed, it runs 2530 minutes shorter than the official version making the total running time about 2+12 hours. a few subtle changes of vocal pitch have been made: "what have i done?", valjean's soliloquy, "stars" by javert, "a little fall of rain" by ponine and marius, "turning", and "castle on a cloud" lose a verse each. during "fantine's arrest" bamatabois loses two verses. the song "fantine's death/confrontation" is edited, and the counterpoint duel between javert and valjean is lost, as well as a verse by fantine. "dog eats dog" by thnardier is heavily truncated. "beggars at the feast", is shortened, with thnardier losing a verse, and the song before it, "wedding chorale", is excluded entirely although the rest of the wedding remains in place. also, the drinker's introduction to "master of the house" is cut completely.


== film adaptation ==

although numerous films of the les misrables story have been made, no film adaptation of the stage musical was produced for many years. a film adaptation was in development at several times since the late 1980s. alan parker was reported to be connected to an adaptation at an early stage.  in 1992 mackintosh announced planning for a film to be directed by bruce beresford and co-produced by tristar pictures, but the project was later abandoned.the 2010 dvd/blu-ray release of les misrables in concert: the 25th anniversary included an announcement of revised plans for a film adaptation which was later confirmed by mackintosh. tom hooper signed on in march 2011 to direct the mackintosh-produced film from a screenplay by william nicholson. in june 2011, working title films and mackintosh announced that the film would begin principal photography in early 2012 for a tentative december release date. the film was given its general us release on christmas day 2012. principal cast members include hugh jackman as jean valjean, russell crowe as javert, anne hathaway as fantine, amanda seyfried as cosette, eddie redmayne as marius, samantha barks as ponine, aaron tveit as enjolras, and sacha baron cohen and helena bonham carter as the thnardiers. other notable actors who played roles in the film include bertie carvel as bamatabois, colm wilkinson, the original valjean, as the bishop of digne, hadley fraser as the army general and frances ruffelle as a prostitute.


== cast recordings ==


=== english ===
the following recordings of les misrables are available in english: the original london cast, the original broadway cast, the complete symphonic recording, the 10th anniversary london concert, the 25th anniversary uk tour cast and the 25th anniversary london concert.


==== original london cast recording ====
the original london cast recording was the first english language album of the musical. recorded in 1985, when the show premiered, it is closest to the original french concept album. for example, "stars" appears before "look down" and shortly after, the original version of "little people" plays, which was later incorporated into the revealing of javert. it also features a song titled "i saw him once", sung by cosette, which was later incorporated into the first part of "in my life". the album has sold 887,000 copies in the us.the cast includes colm wilkinson as valjean, roger allam as javert, patti lupone as fantine, alun armstrong as thnardier, susan jane tanner as mme. thnardier, frances ruffelle as ponine, ian tucker as gavroche, michael ball as marius, david burt as enjolras, rebecca caine as cosette and zo hart
as young cosette.


==== original broadway cast recording ====
the original broadway cast recording was produced in 1987. it included several changes to the songs that are still evident in today's performances. as with its predecessor, it is incomplete, and leaves out songs or parts that are more important narratively than musically (e.g., "fantine's arrest", "the runaway cart", "the final battle"). the album has sold 1,596,000 copies in the us.the cast includes colm wilkinson as valjean, terrence mann as javert, randy graff as fantine, leo burmester as thnardier, jennifer butt as madame thnardier, frances ruffelle as ponine, braden danner as gavroche, david bryant as marius, judy kuhn as cosette, michael maguire as enjolras, and donna vivino as young cosette.


==== complete symphonic recording ====
recorded in 1988 and released in 1989, the complete symphonic recording features the entire score. (the czech revival recording is the only other album, in any language, to feature the entire score; on the other hand, the four 2003 japanese recordings feature the entire score after the cuts first made on broadway at the end of 2000.) cameron mackintosh's original plan was to use the australian cast, but the scope was expanded to create an international cast featuring performers from the major performances of the musical. the cast was recorded in three different places.the album, produced by david caddick and conducted by martin koch, won the best musical cast show album grammy award in 1990. the cast includes gary morris as valjean, philip quast as javert, debra byrne as fantine, gay soper as mme. thnardier, barry james as thnardier, kaho shimada as ponine, ross mccall as gavroche, michael ball as marius, anthony warlow as enjolras, tracy shayne as cosette and marissa dunlop as young cosette.


==== 10th anniversary concert ====

the 10th anniversary recording was of a concert version of les misrables, performed at the royal albert hall in october 1995, featuring full orchestra and choir. all parts were sung live, giving the performance a different mood from other recording. the score was recorded consecutively without pauses or multiple recordings. the concert's encores are also included. as with the original recordings, however, they differed from the stage versions by excluding some songs (e.g., those vital to plot such as "fantine's arrest" and "the runaway cart" were kept, while unnecessary or complex songs, such as "at the barricade", were left out).
the cast includes colm wilkinson as valjean, philip quast as javert, ruthie henshall as fantine, alun armstrong as thnardier, jenny galloway as mme. thnardier, lea salonga as ponine, adam searles as gavroche, hannah chick as young cosette, michael ball as marius, michael maguire as enjolras, judy kuhn as cosette and anthony crivello as grantaire.


==== manchester highlights ====
a five-track album featuring members of the uk national tour was released in 1992 and includes "i dreamed a dream" (ria jones); "stars" (philip quast); "on my own" (meredith braun); "bring him home" (jeff leyton); and "empty chairs at empty tables" (mike sterling). the version of "stars" is the same as that on the complete symphonic recording.


==== 25th anniversary uk tour cast ====
recorded live at the palace theatre in manchester, this recording was released to commemorate 25 years of les misrables in english. this recording featured new arrangements and reinspired orchestrations, and included john owen-jones as valjean, earl carpenter as javert, madalena alberto as fantine, ashley artus as m. thnardier, lynne wilmot as mme. thnardier, gareth gates as marius, katie hall as cosette, samara clarke as young cosette, jon robyns as enjolras, and rosalind james as ponine.


==== 25th anniversary concert ====

the 25th anniversary concert was recorded live at the o2 arena on 3 october 2010 and is available on dvd in the uk while the blu-ray was released worldwide. it was shown in select us theaters via ncm fathom events. the release for the dvd and blu-ray in the united states was 22 february 2011 to promote the film adaptation. a cd single of the 'valjean quartet' singing "bring him home" was also recorded and released, with proceeds going to the charity "tickets for troops". the cast included alfie boe as jean valjean, norm lewis as javert, nick jonas as marius, samantha barks as ponine, katie hall as cosette, ramin karimloo as enjolras, hadley fraser as grantaire, lea salonga as fantine, matt lucas as monsieur thnardier and jenny galloway as madame thnardier.


=== other languages ===
there are also various non-english language cast albums of the musical.


== awards and nominations ==


=== original west end production ===


=== original broadway production ===


=== 2013 toronto revival ===


=== 2014 broadway revival ===


=== 2014 australian revival ===


== see also ==

lists of musicals


== notes ==


== references ==

les miserables reviews box office theatre ltd. retrieved 12 july 2016


=== bibliography ===


== external links ==
official website 
les misrables at the internet broadway database
an archive of performers from the original broadway run of les misrables
an archive of performers from the london run of les misrables