let him have it is a 1991 british drama film directed by peter medak and starring christopher eccleston, paul reynolds, tom courtenay and tom bell. the film is based on the true story of derek bentley.the true story of the case ended with bentley hanged for murder under controversial circumstances on 28 january 1953. while bentley did not directly play a role in the murder of pc sidney miles, he received a greater punishment than the gunman (who was 16).


== plot summary ==
derek bentley (eccleston) is an illiterate, epileptic young adult with developmental disabilities who falls into a gang led by a younger teenager named christopher craig (reynolds). during the course of the robbery of a warehouse in croydon, in which bentley is encouraged to participate by craig, the two become trapped by the police. officers order craig to put down his gun. bentley, who by this time has already been arrested, shouts "let him have it, chris"  whether he means the phrase literally ("let him have the gun") or figuratively ("open fire!") is unclear. craig fires, killing one officer and wounding another. because he is a minor, craig is given a prison sentence for the crime. meanwhile, bentley is sentenced to death under the english common law principle of joint enterprise, on the basis that his statement to craig was an instigation to shoot. bentley's family makes an effort for clemency which reaches parliament. however, the home secretary (who has the power to commute the death sentence) declines to intervene. despite his family's efforts and some public support, bentley is executed in 1953 within a month of being convicted, before parliament takes any official action.


== cast ==


== production ==
paul bergman and michael asimow call attention to the cross examination scene, where "the camera closes in on [bentley's] bruised face as the prosecutor and judge bombard him with questions he can barely comprehend."the film's end titles state that bentley's sister, iris, was still fighting for his pardon. seven years after the film was made and after numerous unsuccessful campaigns to get derek bentley a full pardon, his conviction was eventually overturned by the court of appeal on 30 july 1998, one year after iris's death.


== reception ==
the film gained positive reviews from critics. it holds an 84% approval rating from the review aggregation site rotten tomatoes based on 37 reviews, with an average rating of 7.7/10. the website's critical consensus reads, "led by a gripping performance from christopher eccleston, let him have it sounds a compelling call for justice on behalf of its real-life protagonist."tom wiener said that the film displayed the writers neal purvis and robert wade's "outrage toward a system hell-bent on vengeance" and john ivan simon called the script "first rate, no nonsense".


== references ==


== external links ==
let him have it at imdb
let him have it at box office mojo
let him have it film review, channel 4