little zizou  is a 2008 indian drama film written and directed by sooni taraporevala. little zizou is a comedy about how two battling mumbai families finally come to terms.
little zizou won the "rajat kamal" of 'national film award for best film on family welfare' category at the 56th national film awards.


== plot ==
xerxes, 'little zizou' as he is known, is an eleven-year-old football-crazy parsi boy whose fervent wish is that his idol, zinedine zidane, visit mumbai. his older brother artaxerxes, or art, is a talented artist whose wild fantasies come to life in surprising ways. their father khodaiji is a self-proclaimed protector-of-the-faith who thrives on the attentions (and donations) of hopeful believers.
art burns with unrequited love for the daughter of khodaiji's arch rival, pressvala, a free thinking newspaper publisher. and to the extreme displeasure of their other daughter, xerxes adores the maternal mrs pressvala. but the real fireworks begin when pressvala writes a scathing critique of khodaiji and public reaction is widespread. as the two households fight, life becomes complicated. liana ( the younger daughter), finally lets xerxes be her friend. khodaiji shuts down presswala's office. presswala gets a heart attack. will khodaiji reform his ways? will pressvala let art be zenobe's ( the older daughter)? this is what forms the rest of the story.


== cast ==


== crew ==
banner: jigri dost productions and viacom 18 motion pictures
presented by: mira nair and viacom 18 motion pictures
distributor: viacom 18 motion pictures
produced by: dinaz stafford, sooni taraporevala and vandana malik
written and directed by: sooni taraporevala
original music: bickram ghosh, giuliano modarelli
executive producer: brad gross
director of photography: himman dhamija
production designer: nitin chandrakant desai
art director: amrita singh
editors: t.woody richman and kristina boden
associate editor: rachel reuben
costumes designers: arjun bhasin and shahnaz vahanvaty
director of choreography: shiamak davar


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
little zizou at imdb