little ashes is a 2008 spanish-british drama film set against the backdrop of spain during the 1920s and 1930s, as three of the era's most creative young talents meet at university and set off on a course to change their world. luis buuel watches helplessly as the friendship between surrealist painter salvador dal and the poet federico garca lorca develops into a love affair.
little ashes won the glaad media award for "outstanding filmlimited release" during the 21st glaad media awards.


== plot ==
in 1922, 18-year-old salvador dal (robert pattinson) arrives at art school in madrid. the residencia de estudiantes, or students' residence, is a modern environment which encourages spain's brightest young minds. salvador, who is determined to become a great artist, soon catches the attention of the resi's social elite  poet federico garca lorca (javier beltrn) and aspiring filmmaker luis buuel (matthew mcnulty). together, they form the nucleus of the most modern artist group in madrid.
their private lives become increasingly complex, as federico ignores the advances of devoted friend and writer magdalena (marina gatell), and salvador himself feels the pull of federico's magnetism. luis, becoming increasingly isolated by the duo's closeness, decides to move to paris to fulfill his own artistic ambitions. meanwhile, salvador and federico leave madrid to spend the summer at the seaside village of cadaques, at the home of dal's family.
federico finds himself accepted into the dal family as he and salvador grow closer until, one night, their friendship becomes romantic. even as they draw closer, their relationship appears doomed. luis visits them at university and becomes more suspicious and appalled by their apparent intimacy.
salvador finds federico's obsession more than he is prepared to handle, and eventually leaves for paris. enveloped by the high society and decadence there, salvador is soon entangled with gala (arly jover), a married woman with a penchant for celebrities. when federico visits, he finds his friend is a changed man, both in his life and his politics.


== background ==
details of the relationship between artist salvador dal and poet federico garca lorca have long been the subject of speculation and debate among historians and biographers. in little ashes, dal's and lorca's feelings are shown deepening into a love affair that the sexually repressed painter tries (but fails) to consummate.
between 1925 and 1936, during the course of their friendship, dal and lorca exchanged numerous letters. the original manuscripts of dal's letters to lorca are held by the fundacin federico garca lorca in madrid, and those of lorca to dal are held by fundacion gala-salvador dal in pubol, as well as in private collections. while it is widely acknowledged that lorca was infatuated with dal, for years the painter denied entering into a relationship with lorca.

dal stated: he was homosexual, as everyone knows, and madly in love with me. he tried to screw me twice .... i was extremely annoyed, because i wasn't homosexual, and i wasn't interested in giving in. besides, it hurts. so nothing came of it. but i felt awfully flattered vis--vis the prestige. deep down i felt that he was a great poet and that i owe him a tiny bit of the divine dal's asshole. he eventually bagged a young girl, and she replaced me in the sacrifice. failing to get me to put my ass at his disposal, he swore that the girl's sacrifice was matched by his own: it was the first time he had ever slept with a woman.
the film's writer philippa goslett supposes:

it's clear something happened, no question... when you look at the letters it's clear something more was going on there[...] it began as a friendship, became more intimate and moved to a physical level but dal found it difficult and couldn't carry on. he said they tried to have sex but it hurt, so they couldn't consummate the relationship.
biographer of both dal and lorca, ian gibson, stated: 

it depends how you define an affair, he [dal] was terrified of being touched by anyone, so i don't think lorca got far.
in the repressed spain of the mid 1930s, lorca's homosexuality seems to have provided an additional thrill to those who assassinated him in 1936. lorca's biographer leslie stainton has suggested that the killers made remarks about his sexual orientation


== cast ==
robert pattinson as salvador dal
javier beltrn as federico garca lorca
matthew mcnulty as luis buuel
marina gatell as magdalena
bruno oro as paco
esther nubiola as adela
marc pujol as carlos
arly jover as gala dal
simn andreu as fernando del valle
vicky pea as magdalena's aunt
rubn arroyo as rafael
diana gmez as ana mara
pep sais as art teacher
joan pic as young officer
ferran aud as guard 1
adra allu as guard 2
ferran lahoz as seor milagro
cristian rodrigo as young journalist
sue flack as madam
adrian devant as puppeteer
ramn enrich as professor
xavi siles as man 1
philippa goslett and hannah rtzou as federico's sisters
paco alonso as gypsy singer


== production ==
the title is taken from salvador dal's 192728 painting cenicitas (little ashes). it was originally called the birth of venus, before being changed to sterile efforts and then finally cenicitas. it was first displayed on 20 march 1929 in a madrid exhibition. it was again displayed in his first solo exhibition in paris in june 1931. the painting is currently in the dal collection of the museo nacional centro de arte reina sofa in madrid.


== release ==
little ashes premiered at the 16th annual raindance film festival in london.  the sold-out screening was scheduled on 7 october 2008 at 19:00, and a second screening was also added for 8 october at 14:30. little ashes premiered in the us at the miami gay & lesbian film festival. on 8 may 2009 it premiered in only 11 us locations.
the uk dvd was released on 13 july 2009 and is rated 15. the us dvd was released on 26 january 2010.


== critical reception ==
the film holds a "rotten" rating of 24% based on 70 reviews with an average rating of 4.2 out of 10 on the film review aggregator rotten tomatoes. the site's consensus states, "it has a beautiful cast, but little ashes suffers from an uneven tone and a surplus of unintentionally silly moments."ty burr of the boston globe panned the film and wrote: "what's intended to be a daring look at repressed sexuality, three-ways and all, has the dramatic heft of a true-love comic book".greg quill of the toronto star wrote: "even cinematographer adam suschitzky's richly textured and resonantly toned cityscapes and rural scenes can't make up for a flawed script and weak performances in what might have been a powerful historical drama".chris hewitt of the st. paul pioneer press commented that: "the movie, with its badly painted backdrops, its stiff acting and its complete lack of dramatic momentum, is embarrassing to watch".however, steven rea of the philadelphia inquirer gave the film a positive review by calling it: "a bravely earnest and gauzy bit of biography".


== references ==


== further reading ==
"were spain's two artistic legends secret gay lovers?", the guardian (28 october 2007)
aria film synopsis
george e. haggerty, gay histories and cultures isbn 0-8153-1880-4
ian gibson, the shameful life of salvador dal isbn 0-393-04624-9
salvador dal: an illustrated life, tate publishing isbn 978-1-85437-759-3


== external links ==
little ashes at imdb
little ashes at box office mojo
little ashes at rotten tomatoes