loha is an action indian film released in 1997 indian super hero action crime film directed by kanti shah. the film features essemble cast including dharmendra, mithun chakraborty, govinda (actor), shakti kapoor and mohan joshi. film was a commercial failure at the box office.


== plot ==
loha, is a story of shankar (dharmendra) super hero of iron body. who wants to eradicate crime from the city, and he disguised himself as a panwala from bihar.
the movie begins with an aspiring underworld don, lukkabhai (mohan joshi) ousts his erstwhile mentor tandyabhai (deepak shirke) to emerge as the reigning champion of a crime infested world. elsewhere, arjun (mithun chakraborty), is a soldier  and loves his girlfriend karishma (ramya krishnan) . arjun is after life of a local goon vikraal. vikraal (rajesh vivek) removes karishma's clothes and strips her naked. he slams her on the ground and rapes her brutally.  as a result, arjun seeks obsessive refuge in liquor.
shankar saves arjun's life and after listening to arjun's story decides to help him. meanwhile, severely inconvenienced by shankar's righteous meddling, lukkabhai brutally rapes and killed shankar's sister to teach him a lesson. infuriated, shankar teams up with arjun, who now is indebted to him and another alien named as mustafabhai (shakti kapoor), who wants payback, as lukkabhai had chopped his hands off.
together, they deliver the king pin of the underworld and his minions to a well-deserved end. re-instating a proverbial triumph of good over evil, restoring harmony and justice in the society. thereby resurrecting their previously bruised societal images.


== cast ==
dharmendra as shankar
mithun chakraborty as arjun
ramya krishnan as karishma
sujata mehta as police inspector sujata singh.
rami reddy as takla
mohan joshi as lukka bhai
shakti kapoor as mustafa
deepak shirke as tandiya
kiran kumar as commissioner
ishrat ali as inspector kaale
razak khan as munna mobile
harish patel as salim
rajesh vivek as thakur vikraal 'mahakaal'
govinda as himself(special appearance)
manisha koirala as herself (special appearance)
alphonsa (special appearance)


== soundtrack ==
music: tabun, lyrics: nitin raikwar and saawan kumar.

"teri behna se dosti" - abhijeet bhattacharya, poornima
"toot gaya dil" - kumar sanu
"pee le pee le pinewale" - vinod rathod, poornima
"main kachchi kali hoon" - shweta shetty
"door na jao jee" - suneeta rao


== references ==

loha at british film institute


== external links ==
loha at imdb