looks and smiles is a 1981 british drama film directed by ken loach. it is based on the novel of the same name, written by barry hines. the film was entered into the 1981 cannes film festival, where loach won the young cinema award.the film was shot in black-and-white entirely on location in sheffield.  there is some yorkshire dialect in the film, although not as much as in previous loach-hines collaborations such as kes and the price of coal.  despite this, the review in the new york times complained that "a great deal of the dialogue remains unintelligible to the american ear."ken loach considered the film a failure and turned to making documentaries for several years afterwards, saying that the film failed to "create the outrage in the audience that should have been there".  he also considered it "the end of an era" as he avoided long camera shots in subsequent films.  a 2016 guardian article wrote, "even the most devoted fan found 1981s looks & smiles painfully miserable".  in support of the film, it has been held up as one of ken loach's film that does not propagate one political view heavily, as opposed to fatherland or land and freedom


== plot ==
a disadvantaged young man tries to get by in margaret thatcher's england. writing in his book the cinema of ken loach, jacob leigh comments: "looks and smiles reveals the depression people felt in the industrial north of england in the 1980s; but it is as depressing as mick's life. ... loach's characteristic attention to detail renders the film a period piece."


== cast ==
graham green - michael 'mick' walsh
carolyn nicholson - karen lodge
tony pitts - alan wright
roy haywood - phil
phil askham - mr. walsh
pam darrell - mrs. walsh
tracey goodlad - julie
patti nicholls - mrs. wright
cilla mason - mrs. lodge
les hickin - george
arthur davies - eric lodge
deirdre costello - jenny (as deidre costello)
jackie shinn - gatekeeper
christine francis - careers officer
rita may - receptionist


== references ==


== external links ==
looks and smiles at imdb
full movie on dailymotion
looks and smiles at the bfi's screenonline