loudspeaker is a 2009 malayalam film produced, written, and directed by jayaraj, starring mammootty, sasi kumar, gracy singh, jagathy sreekumar, cochin hanifa, saleem kumar, and kpac lalitha.


== plot ==
the movie is all about the relationships between two rare bred men from extremely different strata of society, but more in common than is apparent from the first look. they might have never run into each other, with their stark contrast in nature and life styles and would have hardly given each other a second look, if they hadn't met in these defined circumstances. but the movie throws them together, intertwined in worst of their days and progressively built in the rapport between the extremes, and infuses the spirit of worthy and meaningful life to all in the screen and those who  watches them on screen.
mammootty  plays the lead role mike philippose, a barefooted uneducated simpleton (from thopramkudy),who lands in the city, armoured with his loud voice, opinions and dazzling wit to stand up with the different level of etiquettes he finds in the flats of the city. his arrival is as a kidney donor to ailing anand menon, an astrophysicist who returned to india after working in the united states for the last forty six years. a dejected man who wants to run away from his memories, menon is turned into the reverse track by mike, who lives with his memories and snobs about his deceased father and about the silent hamlet of thopramkudy. 
the movie packs a lot of characters like the old man (janardhanan) in legal tussle with his children, the fighting couple (kalpana and reghu) who even don't like to see face to face, a secretary of the flat residents (jagathy) who only has a dog for his company, a group of loud bachelors and a kid who turns into a brat, left alone and away from her parents.


== cast ==
mammootty as philipose
sasi kumar anand menon
gracy singh as annie
jagathy sreekumar as secretary geevarghese
kpac lalitha as kunjannama
janardhanan as old man
nayanthara chakravarthy as angela
babu swami asouseph, kunjannama's husband
bheeman raghu as madhavan nair
kalpana as rugmini
augustine as watchman mohan das
salim kumar as kp
cochin haneefa as organ agent sarangadharan
guinness pakru as organ agent
suraj venjaramood as counselor eswarapillai kumarapillai
harisree ashokan as kathanar
gopi asan as valliya ammavan
unnikrishnan namboothiri as menon's relative
rugmini warassyar as menon's relative
anoop menon as dr. ollurkkaran
valsala menon as annie's mother
sukumari as head nurse
kundara johny as loanshark
ambika mohan as menon's relative
subair alappuzha as dr. philson
abu salim
sreejith ravi as bachelor
suraj as bachelor
romeo as bachelor
suraj devaraj as bachelor


== soundtrack ==
the songs of loudspeaker were composed by bijibal and lyrics were written by anil panachooran. "alliyambal", a famous song from rosy composed by job master and sung by k. j. yesudas, is adopted in this film. the new version of the song is sung by his son, vijay yesudas.
"changazhi muthumayi" - sung by ganesh sundaram
"kattarinu thorathoru"- jayachandran. composer: bijibal manayil lyrics: anil panachooransinger: p.jayachandran

"manjinte mamala"
"alliyambal" - sung by vijay yesudas
"kattarinu thorathoru - anjali muraleedharan (female)"
"changazhi muthumayi (male)"


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
loudspeaker at imdb