love breakups zindagi (transl.love breakups life) is a  hindi romantic film, directed by sahil sangha and produced by zayed khan under the banner of sahara motion pictures and born free entertainment. it  stars zayed khan and dia mirza in the lead roles. the music is composed by the duo salimsulaiman and the lyrics are penned by javed akhtar. the movie released on 7 october 2011.


== plot ==
love breakups zindagi is a movie that does not try to answer the question related to love, breakups and life.
jai (zayed khan) and naina (dia mirza) are almost "settled" in their life but missing something or someone who will complete them. jai  feels that magic and serendipity have passed him by. naina is a successful photographer and has taught herself that a less than fulfilling life is enough for her. but is it?
govind (cyrus sahukar) has a colourful past and is on his way to another major, seemingly all wrong relationship. but what if this 'mistake' is the love he has been looking for all his life? sheila (tisca chopra) has stayed single for a long time waiting for mr. perfect. when he does appear, will she take her chance at love, look beyond the odds that divide to see what binds them in a perfect whole?
ritu (umang jain) lives on breakups and ice cream. will she ever find a man and share a beginning and not just a closure? arjun (satyadeep misra) and gayatri (auritra ghosh) are the perfect couple on the brink of a dream wedding. will their love inspire the others to listen to their heart? dhruv (vaibhav talwar) and radhika (pallavi sharda) are driven workaholics ignoring the small text of their lives. will they wake up to see what they have missed in their desire for everything?
the characters try to find personal truths, shed illusions, laugh, cry, grow and learn the biggest lesson of all: that even if you don't go looking for love, it will come looking for you.


== cast ==
zayed khan as jai malhotra
dia mirza as naina kapoor
cyrus sahukar as govind
tisca chopra as sheila thapar
satyadeep mishra as arjun
vaibhav talwar as dhruv
auritra ghosh as gayatri
pallavi sharda as radhika
umang jain as ritu
farida jalal as beeji
soni razdan
ritesh deshmukh as kunal (special appearance)
boman irani   as mr. thapar, sheila's dad (special appearance)
shabana azmi  as naina's mom (special appearance)
shahrukh khan as himself (special appearance)


== world television premiere ==
it was premiered on hindi entertainment channel sahara one for inr 69 crores.


== soundtrack ==
music of love breakups zindagi was launched on 5 september 2011. the music is composed by the duo salimsulaiman and the lyrics are penned by javed akhtar. the album received mostly positive reviews from critics. sheetal tiwari of bollyspice awarded 3 stars saying, "all in love, love breakups zindagi, practices what it preaches in that it has songs of love, life and all that lies in between. rab rakha and chhayee hai tanhayee are obviously come out on top while love love love and rozaana are close runners-up. in any event, there is something to be loved about each track from the soundtrack and the merchant brothers continue to remind us why they are considered as one of the best music duos of the current era." joginder tuteja of bollywood hungama gave the album 3.5 stars and stated, "this is turning out to be one real good season when it comes to romantic feel good music being churned out in bollywood. go for love breakups zindagi, it will pleasantly surprise you."the album also included a remix of the song "main se meena se" from the 1987 film khudgarz, sung by sonu nigam and shreya ghoshal.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
love breakups zindagi has not received encouraging reviews. preeti arora from rediff.com gave it 2 stars out of 5, calling it predictable. gaurav malani of the times of india lamented the fact that director sahil singha doesn't show any innovation in the storytelling of his debut venture. popular film critic rajeev masand, who writes for cnn-ibn, said that love breakups zindagi the kind of over-familiar schmaltz that might have felt less of a slog, had it featured charismatic leads. he rated the movie 2 out of 5. fullhyd.com praised the film's music and visuals, but said that the dialogue is too stilted and stagey to believe, and the banter too forced.there have been a few positive reviews, though. dna's akansha naval-shetye & soumyadipta banerjee have said that the movie is fun even though it is clichd. zee news called it a fair attempt by a bunch of debut producers and directors.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
love breakups zindagi at imdb
love breakups zindagi on facebook