love story is a 1981 indian romantic movie directed by rahul rawail. the film stars rajendra kumar alongside his son kumar gaurav and vijeta pandit, both making their film debuts. vidya sinha, danny denzongpa, amjad khan and aruna irani appear in supporting roles.
kumar gaurav was launched in bollywood through love story. the film achieved "all time blockbuster" status, making kumar gaurav a "star" overnight.
the film had revenues of over 1 crore in mumbai territory. the movie had the third-highest earnings of 1981 after kranti and naseeb. it did over 6 cr business in india with approximately 3.50 cr distributor share.


== plot ==
vijay mehra (rajendra kumar) is a wealthy builder and loves suman (vidya sinha), who also loves vijay. ram dogra (danny denzongpa) is a civil engineer who loves suman. ram and suman were friends in college.
but vijay leaves suman because he feels jealousy of ram and suman's friendship and marries another girl, and suman marries ram, but vijay's wife dies after giving birth to a baby boy, bunty, while suman and ram welcome a baby girl, pinky.
years later, bunty (kumar gaurav) and pinky (vijeta pandit) meet as strangers, vijay wants bunty to become a builder with him, but bunty wants to become a pilot, due to this reason, bunty leaves home, and pinky also leaves the home because her father wants her to marry.
bunty and pinky meet again, but hawaldar sher singh (amjad khan), who is assigned the job of finding the missing boy and girl, handcuffs them together, after some of good and bad circumstances, both fall in love with each other, they go somewhere unknown place and build a small cottage and live happily.
but, not ever after. ram enters the scene and forcibly takes away pinky. now, vijay is ready to accept his son's love, but ram plans to get his daughter married against her wishes.
bunty and pinky run away from home again, but a gang of robbers follow them, suddenly, vijay and ram come to save their children and bunty saves ram's life. ram changes his mind, and in the end bunty and pinky marry.


== cast ==
rajendra kumar as vijay mehra
kumar gaurav as bunty mehra
vijayta pandit as pinky dogra
vidya sinha as suman dogra
danny denzongpa as ram dogra
amjad khan as constable sher singh
aruna irani as dancer
beena banerjee as vijay's wife
bharat kapoor as basheera


== legacy ==
love story remains one of the most popular romantic films in bollywood history, for the innocent adolescent love of bunty and pinky. the film helped to cement kumar gaurav and vijayta pandit's acting careers in the bollywood industry.
the beautiful locations of kashmir, the lovely songs, the cute pair of kumar gaurav and vijayta pandit were the main attractions.
amit kumar, (son of kishore kumar) won the filmfare best male playback award in 1981 for the song "yaad aa rahi hai".
the film was later remade into telugu as prema sankellu (1982), by vijaya nirmala and starred her son naresh.


== soundtrack ==
all the songs became mega-hits at that time. except one, all songs have sung by amit kumar, along with lata mangeshkar and asha bhosle giving female voice. the music was composed by r. d. burman, with lyrics by anand bakshi.


== box office ==
the film was a huge success in 1981 and broke many records at the box office. it was an all-time blockbuster along with kranti, naseeb,  ek duje ke liye and lawaaris.


== awards and nominations ==
filmfare best male playback award - won by amit kumar for the song "teri yaad aa rahi hai"
filmfare nomination as best actor in a supporting role - amjad khan
filmfare nomination for best music - r.d. burman


== references ==


== external links ==
love story at imdb
love story on facebook
cult of kumar