lucky is a 2012 kannada romantic comedy film starring yash and ramya in the lead roles. the film is directed by dr. suri, a dentist by profession, who makes his debut in film direction. arjun janya is the music director of the film. actress turned producer, radhika kumaraswamy has produced the venture under shamika enterprises along with the assistance of h. d. kumaraswamy and v raghavendra bunty. the film released across karnataka cinema halls on 24 february 2012.in 2018, the film was dubbed in hindi as heart attack 3.


== cast ==
yash as lucky/vikram
ramya as gowri
sharan as lucky's friend
sadhu kokila
chikkanna
vijay chendoor


== plot ==
the storyline is light-hearted and revolves around vikram kumar alias lucky (yash) who is in love with a television anchor gowri (ramya). gowri gives lucky the cold shoulder, and helping her keep lucky at an arms length is her dog zoo zoo. gowri is compelled to resign from her job and takes over as creative head of an advertising company. lucky comes for a job interview and figuring that gowri would probably not let him get a job in her work place, he takes on a different identity, vicky, complete with new wardrobe and changed hairstyle.
vicky builds a rapport with gowri and proposes to her. then, he comes to know that shes pining for lucky. vicky tries to prove that he himself is lucky but fails everytime as his friend had already destroyed all the things linked to lucky on his own advice. 
gowri strongly believes if it was lucky, zoo zoo would have chased him out. 
vicky resigns from job and later turns up dressed as lucky. gowri still rejects him saying she has started adoring vicky. 
later she however confesses to zoo zoo that she knows both lucky and vicky are the same person and that she s rejecting him as she doesn't want zoo zoo to feel abonded.
in the end, after seeing how gowri adores lucky, zoo zoo reunites them.


== critical reception ==
lucky opened to average response across karnataka with mixed reviews. ibnlive gave the movie 3.5 stars out of 5 saying, "other than 'one' fresh point in the film, which has given due importance to the relationship between the heroine and a dog, 'lucky' is too predictable, inconsistent and illogical. ". while supergoodmovies.com gave the movie a negative review by giving 2.5 stars out of 5 and said, "it is nothing but an ordinary brain and very ordinary screenplay in lucky" further branding it as "it is unlucky". indiaglitz.com also gave it an average review by giving 5.5 stars out of 10 and said, "another debutant director dr soori has erred with no tight script and screenplay. the concept of pleasing-realizing-forgiving is the age old concept in indian cinema. in addition to it the inexcusable is the simple transformation not identified by the female protagonist looks so inept handling of the director"


== soundtrack ==
arjun janya composed the background score and music for the film's soundtrack. the album consists of five tracks. lyrics for the tracks were penned by ghouse peer, shashank, jayant kaikini and yogaraj bhat.


== references ==


== external links ==
lucky at imdb