lucky ghost is a 1942 american film directed by william beaudine. the film is a sequel to the 1941 film mr. washington goes to town.the film is also known as lady luck (new american title).


== plot ==
washington delaware jones (mantan moreland) has never done much good for his town, and ultimately he is ordered by a judge to leave for good. in following the judge's order he brings his friend and collaborator jefferson (f.e. miller), and the two men go on a search for a new place to live.
both lack professional experience and start thinking about what kind of jobs they might be apt for. since they both agree on liking food, they decide on becoming food tasters. when they come to the first destination on the road, they pretend to be food inspectors and start stealing chickens from a farm, but the farmer (nathan curry) shoots after them. they meet a man of some wealth named brown (harold garrison), whose car has stopped alongside the road, and his friend dawson (jessie cryer).
while brown's chauffeur (napoleon whiting) runs along to find gas, the four remaining men start throwing dice. washington and jefferson win all the other two have, including the car, and they are driven by the chauffeur to a nearby country club run by dr. brutus blake (maceo bruce sheffield). blake is a swindler, and when he sees the two men arrive in their elegant car, he decides to take them for what they have. blake arranges a crap game where outcome is fixed to his advantage. since blake's partner blackstone (arthur ray) doesn't approve of his tactics, they argue, and blackstone threaten to reveal to the guests what blake is up to.
blake has a thing for the club hostess (florence o'brien), and later that night he sees washington dance with her. he becomes jealous and challenges washington to a fight. blake manages to knock himself out during the fight, and when he wakes up he is more determined than ever to take the two guests money.
everyone is unaware that the place is haunted by blake's dead relatives, and they are quite disappointed with how blake has turned out. they also regret leaving the place to him in their wills and send one of them, uncle ezra dewey, to set blake straight.
the gambling begins, and soon washington and jefferson has won the whole club from blake through a bet. ezra finds that the place is just as sinful and decadent under the management of washington and jefferson as it was under blake. the former owners  start scheming to get the place back, and deciding to let the local sheriff arrest them for made-up criminal offenses.
ezra finds out about blake's wicked plans and scares him off. all the ghosts then go on to scare off washington and jefferson, by haunting the club, and the two men flee for their lives.


== cast ==
mantan moreland as washington
f.e. miller as jefferson
maceo bruce sheffield as dr. brutus blake
arthur ray as blackstone
florence o'brien as hostess
harold garrison as brown
jessie cryer as dawson
napoleon whiting as chauffeur
jess lee brooks as door man
ida coffin as hat check girl
nathan curry as farmer
millie monroe as first waitress
louise franklin as second waitress
lucille battle as third waitress
avanelle harris as fourth waitress
monte hawley as masher
vernon mccalla as first man guest
harry levette as first man diner
henry hastings as uncle ezra's ghost
florence field as mrs. ezra's ghost
john lester johnson as first ghost
edward thompson as second ghost
lester christmas as third ghost
reginald fenderson as dealer


== soundtrack ==
lorenza flennoy and his chocolate drops - "if anybody cares" (written by don swander and june hershey)
lorenza flennoy and his chocolate drops - "when you think of loving, think of me" (written by don swander and june hershey)
lorenza flennoy and his chocolate drops - "can't use it anymore" (written by don swander and june hershey)
lorenza flennoy and his chocolate drops - "down in old darktown"


== references ==


== external links ==
lucky ghost is available for free download at the internet archive
lucky ghost at imdb