maa tujhhe salaam english: salute to you, mother) is a 2002 indian hindi action film released on january 25, 2002. this movie stars sunny deol, tabu and arbaaz khan.


== plot ==
maa tujhhe salaam is the story of an indian military officer, major pratap singh, who aborted a terrorist infiltration attempt of the enemy country single-handedly with the help of a few local civilians, at an area that's located near the border of india.
zhonabad is the name of the area that is located at the high-altitude mountain ravines. in this area lives a man called lala. since his ancestors were landlords before independence, lala is a much respected and influential man there. but behind the curtain, he  is a pakistani agent who helps infiltration of terrorists and ammunition through the passes in mountains known to him and his men only. in the winter season, the weather conditions become unfit for inhabitants of the area, who are forced to shift to other places from there. lala takes advantage of this situation and carries out his activities.
albaksh is an illiterate person. he works like a slave for lala, without knowing that lala is indulging in anti-national activities. he is lala's main henchman.
captain sonia, a military intelligence officer, gets to know of lala and albaksh's anti-national activities and she informs the military of it. the military authorities order major pratap to go to zhonabad to keep an eye on lala and albaksh. in the meanwhile, albaksh comes to know of lala's activities. he opposes lala, but invites his wrath in turn. lala frames and portrays alabksh as a traitor and terrorist in the eyes of law. the police arrest albaksh.
subsequently, major pratap meets albaksh, who reveals lala's activities and also how he is all set to help the infiltrators into the country through zhonabad. since there isn't much time for the indian military force to reach zhonabad, major pratap decides to fight the battle alone with the help of albaksh and the local people.
in the final scene, major pratap, arming himself with an arsenal of firearms, attacks a large terrorist force of gul mastan and lala and with the help of albaksh and some indian soldiers, manages to wipe out the entire force. major pratap incapacitates gul, while albaksh thrusts a knife through lala, ending the terrorist threat. major pratap, despite being mortally wounded, manages to survive thanks to the prayers and well wishes of the indian army, who belong to various faiths and religions.


== cast ==
sunny deol as major pratap singh
tabu as captain sonia khanna
arbaaz khan as albaksh
monal as nargis
tinu verma as the lala sultan
mohan joshi as col khanna
sudesh berry as gul mastan
sharat saxena as capt diler singh
vivek shauq as capt. purushottam
deep dhillon as bakhtawar
brij gopal as terrorist
ali khan as imran
rana jung bahadur as inspector ali khan
jeetu verma as sajid
prithvi as satya
anang desai as shiva
avtar gill as maulvi
inder kumar as capt. irshaad khan
nawab shah as nawab
rajat bedi as capt. arshad khan
malaika arora as an item number "sone ke jaisi hai meri jawaani"
vikranta sandhu as khan
sheela sharma as shiva's wife


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
maa tujhhe salaam at imdb