madame x is a 1966 american drama film directed by david lowell rich and starring lana turner. it is based on the 1908 play madame x by french playwright alexandre bisson.


== plot ==
holly parker, a lower-class woman, marries into the rich anderson family, and her husband clayton is a diplomat with strong political aspirations. her mother-in-law estelle looks down on her and keeps a watchful eye on her activities. lonely and reclusive during clayton's long, frequent assignments abroad, holly forms a relationship with a well-known playboy, phil benton. clayton suddenly returns and informs holly that he has secured a promotion in washington, d.c., where he wishes to bring holly and their son clay to begin a regular family life. holly agrees and goes to phil's apartment to end their relationship. phil reacts by trying to physically force holly to stay, but tumbles down a staircase in the struggle and dies. holly panics and leaves the scene. she is confronted by estelle, who had hired a detective to follow her and knows about phil's accident. estelle blackmails holly into disappearing to europe under a false identity rather than facing murder charges. estelle arranges for holly to be secreted away at night from the family yacht, never to see her husband or son again.
holly, devastated by the loss of her son, falls ill with pneumonia on the side of a european street and is rescued by a charming pianist named christian who helps her receive medical treatment and recuperate under a nurse's care. holly and christian grow close as she accompanies him on tour, but when he proposes marriage, she declines and then runs away from christian. holly slowly sinks into depravity and alcoholism, including a one-night stand with a man who steals her money and jewelry.
with estelle's blackmail payments cut off, holly goes to mexico where she lives in a sleazy apartment and cannot afford her rent. she befriends an american neighbor named dan sullivan, who plies her with alcohol but soon discovers evidence of holly's past. he persuades holly to join him in new york to work for him, but while there, she realizes that he is actually trying to blackmail clayton, who is now governor of the state and a leading candidate for his party's presidential nomination. holly shoots and kills sullivan when he threatens to expose her deception to her son. the police arrest her and, refusing to reveal her identity, she signs a confession with the letter "x" and refuses to speak. the court-appointed defense attorney happens to be her son, clay jr., though she does not recognize him.
holly refuses to reveal her name throughout the trial, saying only that she killed sullivan to protect her son, whom she has not seen in decades. clay, in his first trial as a lawyer, devises a defense strategy to paint sullivan as a career criminal who caused his own death. during the trial, holly spots clayton sr. in the audience and suddenly realizes that her attorney is in fact her long-lost son. after final summations and with holly's verdict in the balance, clay, who has grown close to her despite not knowing that she is his mother, visits holly in her holding cell and implores her to reach out to her son. she does not reveal her identity to him but tells him he has been like a son to her. then, having spent her final moments with her son and overcome with emotion, she dies suddenly. clay tells his father that he had come to love "x".


== cast ==


== production ==
producer ross hunter, who had enjoyed great success remaking projects, had long been interested in bringing the bisson play to the screen, but mgm, which had produced film adaptations in 1929 and 1937, owned the rights. after reading the play again at a bookstore, hunter became enthusiastic again. "i knew that if i kept the trial scene and brought the rest up to date i'd have something," he said.hunter announced the film in may 1962 as part of a slate of six projects, also including the thrill of it all, the chalk garden, if a man answers, a new tammy film and a remake of the dark angel. the script was written by jean holloway, who had written for hunter in radio, despite the fact that the play had been enacted many times before. "you really have to tell a whole new story," said holloway.lana turner, who had made imitation of life and portrait in black for hunter, was enlisted as the film's star from the beginning. in october 1962, hunter said that he hoped that douglas sirk would direct."tearjerkers are more difficult to make than any other type of movie," said hunter. "critics would seem to categorize them and look down on them; it is word of mouth that is their best press agent. it's all very sad in a way; maybe this is why we're not building great woman stars for audiences today. audiences need to let their emotions out."hunter signed a seven-year contract with universal in november 1964, with madame x among the leading projects. in february 1965, keir dullea was announced. gig young was offered the older male lead but asked for too much money, so hunter hired john forsythe.hunter said he knew that he needed "the one scene the public would remember", the trial scene. he modernized the play and introduced new characters. "now we have a mother and child relationship that should be seen by parents and children alike," said hunter. "and i believe that for the first time since the bad and the beautiful, lana is giving a really great performance."


=== shooting ===
filming started in march 1965. the film was a co-production between universal and turner's company, eltee.in may, hedda hopper reported that turner was treating hunter "like a dog" and was "nothing but trouble" on the set.


== soundtrack ==
the film contains an original song by austrian composer and conductor willy mattes (also known as charles wildman) titled "love theme from madame x" (alternatively named "swedish rhapsody"). it was recorded by george greeley for his 1957 album the world's ten greatest popular piano concertos.


== reception ==
in 2008, the film was named as one of the 100 nominees in the american film institute's top 10 list of courtroom dramas.


== see also ==
madame x


== references ==


== external links ==
madame x at imdb