madonna (korean: ) is a 2015 south korean mystery-drama film written and directed by shin su-won. it was screened in the un certain regard section of the 2015 cannes film festival. kwon so-hyun won best new actress at the 35th korean association of film critics awards.


== plot ==
due to her mounting bills, moon hye-rim becomes a nurse's aide and is assigned to the vip ward to take care of a patient who has been left paralyzed by a stroke, kim cheol-oh. cheol-oh is a billionaire tycoon and the hospital's major investor, and for ten years his unscrupulous son sang-woo has done everything in his power to extend his father's life through a series of organ transplants because cheol-oh had instructed in his will that his entire fortune is to be given to charities (thereby putting an end to sang-woo's affluent lifestyle). one day, a brain-dead, pregnant young woman named jang mi-na is brought to the hospital after a mysterious car crash. in exchange for a sum of money, hye-rim agrees to sang-woo's instructions that she track down mi-na's next-of-kin and get them to sign an organ donation consent form for her heart. as hye-rim delves into mi-na's past and discovers that mi-na was bullied since childhood for her hair color, weight and poverty, to her adulthood as a sexually abused factory worker who becomes a prostitute named "madonna," the more hye-rim forms a strange bond with her comatose patient and becomes determined to derail the heart transplant.


== cast ==
seo young-hee as moon hye-rim
kwon so-hyun as jang mi-na
kim young-min as kim sang-woo
ko seo-hee as go hyeon-joo
yoo soon-chul as kim cheol-oh, the chairman
ye soo-jung as foul-mouthed old woman
shin woon-sub as dr. han
byun yo-han as dr. im hyeok-gyu
lee myung-haeng as sales team manager park
kim jo-jung as pimp
han song-hee as mi-young
lee sang-hee as ah-ram
park hyun-young as joon-hee
jin yong-wook as jong-dae
kim hyun-sook as mi-na's grandmother
susanna noh as teacher choi
kim jeong-yeon as young mi-na
park ji-young as younger choi
choi hee-jin as coffee shop owner


== awards and nominations ==


== references ==


== external links ==
madonna at the korean movie database
madonna at imdb
madonna at hancinema