mafia is a 1993 indian malayalam- language action crime film, directed by shaji kailas and scripted by renji panicker. it stars suresh gopi, vikram, janardhanan, tiger prabhakar, babu antony, vijayaraghavan and geetha, this film revolved around the bangalore underworld. the film was successful at the box office.


== plot ==
dsp jayashankar (janardhanan), a sincere senior officer with bangalore police is in a direct fight with surya devaraja gowda (tiger prabhakar), an underworld don who rules the city along with chandra gowda (babu antony), his younger brother. his family is too worried about his safety and younger brother harishankar (vikram) always reminds him of it. shivappa (vijayaraghavan), a former mafia leader, now leads a retired life in the city suburbs running a stable. though, retired, he has deep vengeance against gowda, who had broken his leg, making him permanently disabled. jayshankar longs his brother ravishankar (suresh gopi) to join the police. ravi, currently working for deccan chronicle, a leading bangalore daily, is also attempting for ips. one day jayashankar receives a piece of information that a consignment belonging to gowda is arriving in the city. along with inspector narayanan (maniyan pillai raju), he tries to seize the trucks, but is shot killed by the goons. ravishankar, who has just got a letter confirming his selection for ips, reaches jayashankar to inform the news,  witnesses the brutal murder of his brother. ravi reaches out the office of the city police commissioner, but is shocked to find the killers there having a small talk with govindan (m. g. soman), the city deputy police commissioner. ravi reacts violently and raises his hands at govindan, accusing him of siding with gowda. govindan orders the arrest of ravi. the court sentences ravi to 2 years in jail for assaulting a senior police officer on duty. ravi loses his ips selection because of his jail term. upon release, he decides to avenge his brother's death. harishankar introduces ravi to alexandra alias sandra (geetha), the daughter of an ex-mafiosi, who was killed by gowda. sandra is now running a few business offices of which harishankar is the manager. sandra agrees to help ravi in his mission. she introduces him to shivappa. though initially reluctant, he agrees to provide money and weapons in the war against gowda. the central government nominates confers ips for govindan, who is also promoted as the city commissioner. at a function organized to felicitate govindan, ravi intrudes along with hari and insults him publicly. the sudden and violent reaction or govindan is recorded and passed over to higher authorities, causing the suspension of govindan. ravi targets the establishments of gowda. he along with shivappa blackmails nanjappa (renji panicker), the home minister and gets gowda raided. the loss of finance enrages gowda, who sends chandra, his brother to finish out ravishankar. but chandra is killed by ravi. gowda kidnaps hari and offers deal. upon the demand of gowda, ravi arrives, but along with shivappa and his mercenary power. ravishankar successfully saves his brother and finishes off surya devaraja gowda by overrunning cars over him.


== cast ==
suresh gopi as ravishankar
vikram as harishankar
janardhanan as dysp jayashankar
tiger prabhakar as surya devaraja gowda
babu antony as chandra gowda
vijayaraghavan as shivappa a.k.a. sivaraman
geetha as alexandra 'sandra' amelia felix
m. g. soman as deputy city police commissioner m.t. govindan
prathapachandran as city police commissioner n. warrier
rajan p. dev as moosa
k. b. ganesh kumar as murukan
maniyanpilla raju as si narayanan
augustine as anwar
sathaar as krishnan
ranjitha as rekha, warrier's daughter
renuka as uma, jayasankar's wife
yuvarani as sudha
t. s. krishnan as gowda's henchman
renji panicker as excise/home minister
silk smitha as item dancer
remyasree as surya devaraja gowda's wife


== references ==


== external links ==
mafia at imdb