magalir mattum (english: ladies only) is a 2017 indian tamil comedy drama film written and directed by bramma, as his second venture after kuttram kadithal (2015). the film features jyothika, urvashi, bhanupriya, and saranya ponvannan  in the lead roles, while nassar, livingston, gokulnath, and g. marimuthu play supporting roles. the film narrates the story of three female school friends who reunite after 38 years, despite the pressures put upon them by the men in their lives. produced by suriya and featuring music composed by ghibran, the venture began production in july 2016 and had a theatrical release on 15 september 2017. magalir mattum received positive reviews. jyothika was nominated for a best actress category, while urvashi & bhanupriya were nominated for best supporting actress category at  south filmfare awards. 


== plot ==
prabhavathi is a feisty, independent woman who makes documentaries. she lives with her two friends and later moves in with her future mother-in-law gomatha silkurayappan. prabha learns that gomatha misses her school friends subbulakshmi mangalamoorthy, and rani amirthakumari gothandaraman, with whom she has lost contact over the years. prabha becomes determined to reunite gomatha with her friends.


== cast ==


== production ==
after the success of kuttram kadithal (2015), bramma was approached by suriya's production house 2d entertainment to make a film for them. bramma pitched three scripts including one for jyothika to play the leading role in a "female-centric" script, which her husband suriya agreed to finance. jyothika subsequently participated in a series of workshops to get ready for her role in the film for twenty days. for her role, jyothika had to lose weight and learn to ride a motorbike and consequently did so with the help of her husband suriya and professional biker sheeba through lessons in uttar pradesh. in the meantime, bramma worked on finishing the script and completed the process within two months. the film was officially launched in july 2016, with veteran actors saranya ponvannan, bhanupriya, urvashi, nassar and livingston revealed to be joining the cast. the film was revealed to be "thirty percent" complete by august 2016, after the team finished filming a schedule in tindivanam. though it was earlier reported that suriya may appear in a guest appearance, suriya later requested his friend madhavan to portray the role.prior to the film's release, director bramma revealed that he had watched the film over two hundred times. he also stated that after the film's theatrical release, the team planned to take it to international film festivals. to promote the film, the team launched comics in tamil and tanglish that spoke about womens rights, the life they lead, and what marriage does. likewise, following the release of the film's teaser, suriya requested other male celebrities to make dosas for their wives and partners.


== music ==
the film's soundtrack was composed by ghibran. the soundtrack features seven songs and one instrumentals from the original score. the album was launched at sathyam cinemas, chennai on 26 april 2017. the soundtrack included a song sung by actor karthi, as well as three short songs sung by the film's leading veteran actresses. 


== release ==
magalir mattum opened on 15 september 2017 to positive reviews from film critics and audiences. critic ashameera aiyappan of the indian express wrote "the main strength of magalir mattum is the empathy it invokes" and that "brammas writing will bring flashes of conversations with women of your own family and that is a major asset for the movie", while giving it a high rating of 3.5 stars. baradwaj rangan of film companion wrote "the characters are broadly defined..  we know what they do, but not really who they are. perhaps the focus should have been on one womans liberation instead of three. " the satellite rights of the film were sold to zee tamil. the film was dubbed in telugu in 2020 as maghuvalu matrame.


== reception ==
a critic from the new indian express called the casting "terrific", while a critic from the hindu wrote the "cheerful camaraderie between the leads works wonders". sify.com called the film a "watchable, feel-good film" adding "what works in magalir mattum is the feel-good factor, the chemistry between the four actresses urvashi, bhanupriya, saranya ponvannan and jyothika and the climax twist". the critic from behindwoods.com noted "director bramma has proven once again that he is a talented filmmaker with a strong content and a noble motive - kudos to him, for making a celebratory film like this, which is fully surrounded by positivity and feel good moments, though the film dealing a serious subject". the reviewer from the hindustan times wrote that the film is "not without flaws but a film made with a lot of heart", and that it is "the kind of film where you dont mind overseeing the flaws because it leaves you with a heartwarming feeling when you exit the theatre". in contrast, a critic from newsminute.com wrote "magalir mattum has its heart in the right place" and "it's clear that the film wants people to understand the lives of women but it struggles to articulate their stories within the pop culture framework of empowerment".


== references ==


== external links ==
magalir mattum at imdb