mahanubhavudu (transl.great person) is a 2017 indian telugu-language romantic comedy film written and directed by maruthi dasari. it features sharwanand and mehreen pirzada in the lead roles.the film's principal photography commenced on 7 march 2017 and was wrapped in 2 september 2017, and had a worldwide release on 29 september 2017. the movie received positive reviews. the movie was remade in odia in 2019 as ajab sanju ra gajab love starring babushan.


== plot ==
anand (sharwanand) is a young man suffers with obsessive compulsive personality disorder and is very particular about cleanliness and neatness. he doesn't even touch others since he is germophobe and has an unrealistic fear of hospitals since they have infectious patients. he, one day, meets meghana (mehreen pirzada) after an incident involving a man spitting chewing gum on her shoe. he falls in love with her after she tells the man the importance of cleanliness. she later becomes his partner for a company project and eventually falls for him too. she decides to introduce anand to her father, ramaraju (nassar), who has been waiting for his daughter to get married. 
although meghana's father rejects him at first due to his eccentricies, anand saves his stolen bag from a bunch of goons and he accepts him as his son-in-law. however at that time, meghana's father suffers a heart attack. her father begins vomiting blood onto anand and anand drives him to hospital along with meghana. while driving, aanand begins to recollect the incident again and again and experiences nausea. unable to hold his vomit, he stops the car by the road and gets down the car with retching sounds and vomits profusely on the road. he then tells meghana that he can't take her father to the hospital as he is nauseous which shocks her. meghana takes her father to the hospital instead and breaks up with anand because of his insistence over things being clean as well as for his selfishness. the rest of the story revolves around how anand overcomes his ocpd and wins back meghana's heart.


== cast ==
sharwanand as anand
mehreen pirzada as meghana
vennela kishore as kishore
nassar as ramaraju, meghana's father
kalyani natarajan as anand's mother
bhadram as ramaraju's right-hand-man
himaja as meghana's friend
raghu babu as doctor
rajitha
maruthi dasari as cameo appearance in song bhammalu bhammalluu
bhanushree


== soundtrack ==
music composed by s. thaman. the soundtrack was released by mango music.


== references ==


== external links ==
mahanubhavudu at imdb