maharshi (transl.great sage) is a 2019 indian telugu-language action-drama film directed by vamshi paidipally and jointly produced by dil raju, c. ashwini dutt, prasad v. potluri, and param v. potluri through their production companies sri venkateswara creations, vyjayanthi movies, and pvp cinema. the film stars mahesh babu, pooja hegde, and allari naresh while jagapathi babu, prakash raj, jayasudha, meenakshi dixit, and ananya play supporting roles. the music was composed by devi sri prasad.
the plot follows rishi (babu), who becomes the ceo of a us-based software company. when his attention is drawn towards the plight of downtrodden farmers by his friend ravi (naresh), he sets out to help them.
maharshi received mixed reviews from critics. although babu's performance was praised, the film was criticized for predictable, slow and lengthy narration. the film ranks among the highest grossing telugu films. maharshi received two national film awards, including best popular film providing wholesome entertainment and best choreography. the film also won two awards at zee cine awards telugu.


== plot ==
k. rishi kumar, an indian man, becomes the ceo of a us-based software company, origin, and meets his college friends and lecturers at a party in new york.  7 years ago,hailing from a middle-class family in hyderabad, he dreamt to make it big in the software industry and has a tense relationship with his father, k. satyanarayana, a clerk in a private company who is constantly pressurized by moneylenders. rishi moved to vizag for his post-graduation in iiet and he befriends pooja and ravi shankar. ajay, one of the class toppers, becomes jealous after seeing rishi surpass him in all the exams. mp bhanu prasad who is ajay's father, a politician, and a minister, offers rishi money in exchange for stepping down as the topper, but rishi refuses and also thrashes his henchmen. 
later, rishi declines pooja's marriage proposal, feeling that it would hinder his career, and tells her that she is a burden in his heart and it affects to his career ambitious. they break up, and rishi's friendship with ravi, who tried to mend their relation, also gets spoiled. ajay is selected by a top company, origin, with the highest package in the college. however, he comes to know that rishi developed an ai-based operation system and used it to get a much better opportunity with another company. ajay conspires to stop rishi from attending the campus interview by accusing him of stealing the examination papers. however, rishi is found innocent and allowed to write his exams. within a short time, he moves to new york and becomes a leading executive in origin. however, the sudden demise of his father leaves him shattered, following which he takes his mother to the usa.
the film returns to the present, where rishi is devastated to learn from his professor that ravi took the blame for stealing the examination papers in order to save him. ravi's father committed suicide, and his marriage with his girlfriend, pallavi, is called off. rishi reunites with ravi in the latter's hometown, where he learns that ravi has been protesting alone against a company that plans to take away the village farmland for laying oil pipelines. rishi asks vivek mittal, the millionaire businessman behind the project, to exclude the village but the latter declines. hence, rishi sets up his own office in the village to attract media attention and to set a stage for ravi to express his concerns. pooja, now working in a gaming company, is sent by her boss, along with an assistant, to meet rishi regarding sponsorship for a new game. rishi talks to pallavi's father and helps fix the broken alliance. ravi is then made the village leader to express their concerns of the people to the government.
vivek offers more money as compensation to the villagers and also gives money to one of the neighboring villagers to stop further growth of the issue. his henchmen also try to eliminate ravi, but rishi saves him. ravi is hospitalized, and vivek uses the opportunity to tarnish rishi's good intentions and gets him to leave the village. rishi's mother talks him out of giving up and rishi returns to the village to finish what he started. after a farmer inspires him to practice farming, rishi helps the farmers grow crops by leasing them and paying more money than vivek. farmers realize the value of their land, and pooja reconciles with rishi. in a press meet, rishi makes a speech emphasizing the importance of agriculture and the losses faced due to the farmers' suicides. rishi's efforts are appreciated by the chief minister, and ajay, now a leading banking official, exposes vivek, thus ending the project. rishi resigns as the ceo of origin and decides to stay in his homeland promoting agriculture.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by devi sri prasad and released on aditya music company. lyrics were written by sri mani.


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
the film received mixed reviews from the critics who praised babu's performance and the production values while criticising the "predictable, slow and lengthy narration." sangeetha devi dundoo of the hindu wrote, "at the heart of maharshi is a story that could have been leveraged to make a compelling social drama that also traces the transformative journey of an ambitious man. but theres a huge gap between what it could have been and what it is". the times of india gave 3 out of 5 stars stating "watch it not just for mahesh babu and allari nareshs performances but also for the story, if you dont mind all the bells and whistles it comes with. it might not be entertaining all through, thanks to the draggy bits, but its heart is in the right place".hindustan times gave 3 out of 5 stars stating "maharshi is a problematic film with big ideas but it tugs at heartstrings. take out the farming sub-plot, maharshi wouldve been a tiresome watch in which rishi just wont shut up with his sermons on success".cnn-news18 gave 4 out of 5 stars stating "maharshi exudes a sense of comfort and happiness in the midst of the wreckage and targeting".india today gave 2.5 out of 5 stars stating "maharshi has a meaty story in between several sub-plots. if only it was crisp and to the point. if only. mahesh babu's maharshi is not about a business tycoon coming back to his motherland. he has a bigger purpose here".firstpost gave 3 out of 5 stars stating "maharshi is a well-intentioned drama and has some beautifully written sequences; however, it holds back on a lot of things it wants to say for so long that it makes you feel restless at times".


=== box office ===
maharshi on the opening day collected 590 million gross worldwide and in telugu-speaking states (andhra pradesh and telangana) movie collected a share of 246 million.in the first extended weekend (thursday release) movie grossed over 1 billion (100 crore) worldwide. in 11 days, the movie collected 727.9 million in telugu-speaking states (andhra pradesh and telangana).by the end of theatrical run, the film grossed between 1.452 billion worldwide.


== awards and nominations ==


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
maharshi at imdb