mahkla is a deity common to hinduism and buddhism. in hinduism, mahkla is a manifestation of shiva and is the consort of the goddess mahkl; he most prominently appears in the kalikula sect of shaktism. mahkla also appears as a protector deity known as a dharmapala in vajrayana buddhism, particularly most tibetan traditions as citipati, and in shingon buddhism. he is known as dhitin and  daaih'hktn () in mandarin and cantonese, daeheukcheon () in korean, i hc thin in vietnamese, and daikokuten () in japanese.


== etymology ==
mahkla is a sanskrit bahuvrihi of mah "great" and kla "time/death", which means "beyond time" or death.tibetan: , thl: nak po chen po means "great black one". tibetan: , thl: gn po "protector" is also used to refer specifically to mahkla.


== description ==
 
according to  shaktisamgama tantra, the spouse of mahakali is extremely frightening. mahakala has four arms, three eyes and is of the brilliance of 10 million black fires of dissolution, dwells in the midst of eight cremation grounds. he is adorned with eight skulls, seated on five corpses, holds a trident, a drum, a sword and a scythe in his hands. he is adorned with ashes from the cremation ground and surrounded by numbers of loudly shrieking vultures and jackals. at his side is his consort symbolized as kl (, the power of time). both mahakala and kl (, the power of time) represent the ultimate destructive power of brahman and they are not bounded by any rules or regulations.  they have the power to dissolve even time and space into themselves and exist as void at the dissolution of the universe. they are responsible for the dissolution of the universe at the end of kalpa. they are also responsible for annihilating great evils and great daemons when other gods, devas and even trimurtis fail to do so. mahakala and kali annihilates men, women, children, animals, the  world and the entire universe without mercy because they are kala or time in the personified form and time is not bound by anything and time does not show mercy, nor does it wait for anything or anyone. in some parts of odisha, jharkhand and dooars, (that is, in northern bengal), wild elephants are worshiped as mahakala.mahakala is typically black in color.  just as all colors are absorbed and dissolved into black, all names and forms are said to melt into those of mahakala, symbolizing his all-embracing, comprehensive nature. black can also represent the total absence of color, and again in this case it signifies the nature of mahakala as ultimate or absolute reality. this principle is known in sanskrit as "nirguna", beyond all quality and form, and it is typified by both interpretations.mahayana buddhism, and all schools of tibetan buddhism, rely on mahakala as guardian deity. he is depicted in a number of variations, each with distinctly different qualities and aspects. he is also regarded as the emanation of different beings in different cases, namely avalokitevara (wylie: spyan ras gzigs) or cakrasavara (wylie: khor lo bde mchog). mahakala is almost always depicted with a crown of five skulls, which represent the transmutation of the five kles (negative afflictions) into the five wisdoms.
the most notable variation in mahakala's manifestations and depictions is in the number of arms, but other details can vary as well. for instance, in some cases there are mahakalas in white, with multiple heads, without genitals, standing on varying numbers of various things, holding various implements, with alternative adornments, and so on.


=== six-armed mahakala ===
nyingshuk came from khyungpo nenjor, the founder of the shangpa kagyu, and spread to all the lineages (sakya, nyingma, and gelug) and to the kagyu lineages. there are also terma lineages of various forms of six-armed mahakala. nyinghsuk, though derived from the shangpa, is not the major shangpa one; it is in a dancing posture rather than upright, and is a very advanced mahakala practice. the white six-armed mahakala (skt: adbhjastamahkla; wylie: mgon po yid bzhin nor bu) is popular among mongolian gelugpas.

		
		


=== four-armed mahakala ===
various four-armed mahakalas (skt. chaturbhjamahkla, wylie: mgon po phyag bzhi pa) are the primary protectors of the karma kagyu, drikung kagyu, drukpa lineage and the nyingma of tibetan buddhism. a four-armed mahakala is also found in the nyingma school, although the primary protector of the dzogchen (skt: mahasandhi) teachings is ekajati.


=== two-armed mahakala ===
the two-armed "black-cloaked mahakala" (wylie: mgon po ber nag chen) is a protector of the karma kagyu school clad in the cloak of a mntrika "warlock". his imagery derives from terma of the nyingma school and was adopted by the karma kagyu during the time of karma pakshi, 2nd karmapa lama. he is often depicted with his consort, rangjung gyalmo. he is often thought to be the primary protector, but he is in fact the main protector of the karmapas specifically. four-armed mahakala is technically the primary protector. six-armed mahakala (wylie: mgon po phyag drug pa is also a common dharmapala in the kagyu school.
pajarantha mahakala "mahakala, lord of the tent", an emanation of majur, is a protector of the sakya school.

		
		
		
		
		


=== other forms ===

		


== mahakala bhairava ==

mahakala is also known as mahakala bhairava in hinduism, and many temples in india and nepal are dedicated solely for mahakala bhairava, for example at the temple in ujjain, which is mentioned more than once by klidsa. the primary temple, place of worship for mahakala is ujjain. mahakala is also a name of one of shiva's principal attendants (sanskrit: gaa), along with nandi, shiva's mount and so is often represented outside the main doorway of early hindu temples.


== mahakala in japan ==

mahakala (known as daikokuten ) enjoys an exalted position as a household deity in japan, as he is one of the seven lucky gods in japanese folklore.
the japanese also use the symbol of mahakala as a monogram. the traditional pilgrims climbing the holy mount ontake wear tenugui on white japanese scarves with the sanskrit seed syllable of mahakala.
in japan, this deity is variously considered to be the god of wealth or of the household, particularly the kitchen. he is recognised by his wide face, smile, and a flat black hat, in stark contrast to the fierce imagery portrayed in tibetan buddhist art. he is often portrayed holding a golden mallet, otherwise known as a magic money mallet, and is seen seated on bales of rice, with mice nearby (mice signify plentiful food).


== mahakala in china ==
in chinese buddhism, mahakala is not commonly venerated in direct iconographic form. however, he is mentioned in many volumes of the chinese buddhist canon and is invoked as a protective deity in certain mantras, such as the ragama mantra which is popular in chan buddhism  tradition.


== see also ==
vajrakila
shiva (mahakala)


== references ==


== further reading ==
ladrang kalsang (author), pema thinley (trans.) the guardian deities of tibet.  delhi: 1996 reprinted 2003,  winsome books india, isbn 81-88043-04-4
linrothe, rob (1999) ruthless compassion: wrathful deities in early indo-tibetan esoteric buddhist art  london: serindia publications. isbn 0-906026-51-2
de nebesky-wojkowitz, rene. (1956) oracles and demons of tibet. oxford university press. reprint delhi: books faith, 1996. isbn 81-7303-039-1. reprint delhi: paljor publications, 2002. isbn 81-86230-12-2.
william stablein. healing image: the great black one berkeley-hong kong: slg books, 1991. isbn 0-943389-06-2.
william stablein. the mahakalatantra: atheory of ritural blessings and tantric medicine  ph.d. dissertation, columbia university, 1976.
emi matsushita, iconography of mahkla. m.a. thesis, the ohio state university, 2001. link of full-length thesis http://rave.ohiolink.edu/etdc/view?acc_num=osu1141933891
martin gimm zum mongolischen mahkla-kult und zum beginn der qing-dynastiedie inschrift shisheng beiji von 1638 (2000/01)
elliot sperling, rtsa mi lo-ts-ba sangs-rgyas grags-pa and the tangut background to early mongol-tibetan relations, tibetan studies: proceedings of the 6th seminar of the international association for tibetan studies, fagernes, 1992. vol. 2, oslo: the institute for comparative research in human culture, 1994, pp.  801824
todd lewis. scribd. com/doc/13280877/popular-buddhist-texts-from-nepal-narratives-and-rituals-of-newar-buddhism popular buddhist texts from nepal narratives and rituals of newar buddhism. ny: suny publication, 2000.
the ragama stra translation committee of the buddhist text translation society. (2009). the ragama stra: with excerpts from the commentary by the venerable master hsan hua: a new translation. ukiah, ca, usa:  buddhist text translation society.


== external links ==

outline of mahakala iconography - at himalayanart.org
buddhist protector: mahakala (all forms) - at himalayanart.org
khandro.net: mahakala
mahakala thangka painting - six-armed white mahakala manifestation
ragama mantra - mantra invoking mahakala as a protective deity