mail order bride is a 1964 american comedy western film directed by burt kennedy and starring buddy ebsen, keir dullea and lois nettleton. the screenplay concerns an old man who pressures the wild son of a dead friend into marrying a mail-order bride in an attempt to settle him down.


== plot ==
retired lawman will lane promises to look after a dying friend's son. he is given the deed to the man's montana ranch and instructed not to let the friend's son, lee carey, have it until lee gives up his immature ways.
one provision is that lee must marry. will uses a catalog to look for a suitable wife. he ends up finding annie boley, a widow in kansas city with a six-year-old son, working in a saloon for hanna, who originally placed the ad in the catalog.
lee agrees to marry her, with ranch hand jace as his best man, but assures annie that their marriage will be in name only, with no other marital obligations. will learns that jace has been stealing cattle. lee refuses to believe it until jace proposes they rustle together and leave the ranch in ruins.
when jace starts a fire with the boy still inside the house, lee rescues him and comes to his senses. an angry will believes lee conspired with jace to steal the herd and disgustedly gives him the deed. but lee realizes he cares for his new family and asks will to help him get back the cattle. they corner jace in town and in a shootout jace is killed.
lee vows to rebuild the ranch and will rides back to kansas city to court hanna.


== cast ==
buddy ebsen as will lane
keir dullea as lee carey
lois nettleton as annie boley
warren oates as jace
barbara luna as marietta (as barbara luna)
paul fix as sheriff jess linley
marie windsor as hanna
denver pyle as preacher pope
william smith as lank
kathleen freeman as sister sue
abigail shelton as young old maid
james mathers as matt boley
doodles weaver as charlie mary
diane sayer as lily fontaine
ted ryan as bartender


== see also ==
list of american films of 1964


== references ==


== external links ==
mail order bride at imdb
mail order bride at the tcm movie database
mail order bride at allmovie