main hoon na (translation: i'll be there) is a 2004 indian hindi-language masala film written and directed by farah khan in her directorial debut. the film stars shah rukh khan, sushmita sen, sunil shetty, amrita rao and zayed khan and follows ram sharma, an indian soldier sent undercover as a university student to protect a general's daughter from a rogue soldier.the film began development in 2001, and faced a number of delays during production. main hoon na is notable for approaching the indo-pakistani conflict from a neutral perspective. it was filmed at st. paul's school and the surrounding state of west bengal. the film is also the first produced and distributed by red chillies entertainment, and is produced by gauri khan. initially scheduled for release in 2003, main hoon na was released worldwide on 30 april 2004. 
the film set numerous box-office records during its theatrical run, and with over 84 crore (us$12 million) in revenue worldwide, it was the second highest-grossing indian film of 2004, behind veer-zaara. main hoon na received 12 nominations at the 50th filmfare awards, including those for best film, best director for farah khan, best actor for shah rukh khan, best supporting actor for zayed khan, and best supporting actress for rao. it won for best music.


== plot ==
over an attempt to de-escalate tensions between the two nations, india and pakistan launch project milaap, a prisoner exchange program. raghavan dutta (sunil shetty), a former indian soldier discharged for murdering pakistani citizens in revenge for the murder of his son, shoots his former superior, brigadier general shekhar sharma (naseeruddin shah) at a press conference. raghavan runs a militant group with a former colleague khan (murali sharma), set against peace between the countries.
on his deathbed, shekhar informs his son, fellow soldier major ram (shah rukh khan), of his other son lakshman (zayed khan), and asks ram to reconcile with his family. meanwhile, ram's boss, gen. amarjeet bakshi, sends him undercover to protect his daughter sanjana (amrita rao), who studies at the same university as lakshman. during a race, lakshman is saved by ram from falling from the university's roof. the trio becomes friends, and ram moves in with lakshman and his mother madhu (kirron kher). outside a cinema, ram saves his classmate, percy, from an assassination attempt by khan; ram captures him, but his true identity is found out by raghavan, who arrives at the university masquerading as a teacher.
ram falls in love with his teacher, chandni (sushmita sen), while lakshman falls in love with sanjana. at prom, raghavan orders a kidnapping on chandni, but she is saved by ram. after meeting with sanjana, ram requests raghavan to drop the pair to her father. raghavan reveals to lakshman and his mother of ram's true identity; ram informs them his father's last wish implored him to reconcile with his family, but leaves their home and the university when they refuse to accept him.
raghavan then holds the university hostage, demanding the cancelation of project milaap. upon being informed, ram immediately returns back to the university. before fully entering the hostage situation, he encounters madhu and apologizes. knowing what he's about to do, she decides to accept him as a son. accompanying khan, ram enters the building, and is subsequently shot by khan. a plan by the pair to feign ram's death, who successfully frees the hostages, results in khan being killed by raghavan. a fight between ram and raghavan then kills raghavan by removing the pin from raghavan's hand grenade.
lakshman helps ram escape from the ensuing explosion from aboard a helicopter and the two happily embrace as brothers, meanwhile project milaap is a success and all the prisoners are exchanged triumphantly. ram and lakshman go and immerse their father's ashes together, as madhu tearfully looks on. lakshman is finally allowed to graduate alongside ram and the entire university cheers.


== cast ==
shah rukh khan as major ram prasad sharma: a para commando whose objective is to protect sanjana and reconcile with his half-brother and stepmother.
sushmita sen as chandni chopra: ram, sanjana and laxman's chemistry teacher and ram's love-interest.
suniel shetty as ex-major raghavan singh dutta: a rogue ex-para commando who was court-martialed when he started killing innocent pakistani citizens and claiming that they were spies without evident.
amrita rao as sanjana "sanju" bakshi: general bakshi's daughter and lucky's love interest (few lines as mona ghosh shetty)
zayed khan as lakshman "lucky" prasad sharma: ram's half-brother and sanju's love-interest
kirron kher as madhu sharma: ram's stepmother and lucky's mother
kabir bedi as general amarjeet bakshi: sanju's father and ram's superior officer
naseeruddin shah as brigadier general shekhar prasad sharma: ram and lucky's father (cameo)
murli sharma as ex-captain khan: raghavan's second-in-command
bindu as mrs. sonali kakkar, the hindi teacher, who is very bad at speaking english
boman irani as yogant kumar: college principal, who is very forgetful
satish shah as professor rasai, the physics teacher, who spits while speaking, and is very short-tempered
kunal kumar as baman: a student who helps ram hack into university's students' list to search for lucky
rakhi sawant as mini, a flirtatious student
tabu as aparna: a girl watching ram's dance rehearsal (uncredited cameo)
geeta kapoor as girl dancing; in song "gori gori" (cameo)
sajid khan as band member; in song "gori gori" (cameo)
praveen sirohi as vivek, a jock student
rajeev punjabi as percy, a nerdy student


== production ==


=== development ===
the film was planned by farah khan and shahrukh khan in 2001. the shooting of the film had to begin in october 2001 but later that year, shahrukh khan got badly injured while shooting an action sequence for his 2002 film shakti: the power due to which he suffered pain in filming for his other projects. he was later sent to england for treatment and the film was subsequently shelved. the film was later revived in 2003 after shahrukh khan came back from england; farah khan wanted to name it the outsider. after some of her friends suggested that the title she wants matches that of a 1983 hollywood film, she finalized the title main hoon na for the film though shahrukh khan was unhappy at that time with the title, thinking the title was incomplete, but later changed his mind after listening to the recording of the film's title song.


=== casting ===
at a time when the film was revived in 2003, hrithik roshan, farhan akhtar, and sohail khan were considered for lucky's role. due to unknown reasons, none of the three accepted the film; zayed khan was later signed. ameesha patel was offered sanju's role but rejected the character due to date issues, as did then-newcomer ayesha takia when she was also approached who also declined, after which amrita rao was finalized for the role.shah rukh khan asked farah khan to approach kamal haasan to play the antagonist, suggesting that haasan owed him a favour for his role in hey ram (2000). kamal haasan heard the script but turned down the role citing that it would portray him as an anti-national.


== critical reception ==
film analyst taran adarsh praised the film for being funny, emotional and full of action, describing it as "a wholesome entertainer that has something for everyone."jamie russell wrote in his review in the bbc, "a bonkers 'masala' movie, main hoon na could be the mutant offspring of grease (1978) and the matrix (1999). part-thriller, part high-school comedy and all bollywood musical, it's the directorial debut of farah khan."


== box office ==
main hoon na was the second-highest grossing indian movie of 2004 behind veer-zaara (also a shahrukh khan-starrer set against india-pakistan backdrop). it made 480 million (us$6.7 million) in india and an additional 19 million (us$270,000) in the overseas market.


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by anu malik. the lyrics were provided by javed akhtar. anu malik won his second best music award at filmfare. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 2.1 million units sold, the film's soundtrack album was the fifth-highest selling bollywood soundtrack of the year. sonu nigam received several award nominations and an mtv immies best male singer award.a snippet from the song ''lament'' by artist light of aidan from the compilation album caf del mar, vol. 12 is used throughout the film.


=== track listing ===


== awards and nominations ==
main hoon na received many awards and nominations:


== remake ==
in 2008, the film was remade in tamil and released as aegan.


== references ==


== external links ==
main hoon na at imdb
main hoon na at rotten tomatoes
main hoon na at box office mojo