maine dil tujhko diya (english: i gave my heart to you) is a 2002 indian hindi romantic action film, directed by and starring sohail khan, who makes his acting debut along with another debutante, sameera reddy. the film also features sanjay dutt, kabir bedi and dalip tahil in supporting roles.


== plot ==
ajay (sohail khan) is head of his college group named the aryans. ajay is introduced to a girl named ayesha (sameera reddy) and they become friends. gradually, ajay and ayesha fall in love with each other. this enrages ayesha's father (kabir bedi) because of his status. ajay challenges to get ayesha back to him in the nick of time. mr. varma's friend and business partner chopra (dalip tahil) also becomes enraged and decides to finish off ajay, but chopra has an ulterior motive, for chopra's son (raja bherwani) to marry ayesha to acquire the verma family's wealth.
so chopra appoints a notorious criminal bhaijaan (sanjay dutt) to finish off ajay. but bhaijaan refuses as he does not do any wrong deeds in the month of ramadan. so bhaijaan appoints his two head henchmen munna (rajpal yadav) & chhote (sarfaraz khan). ajay at first empowers them during a fight but no sooner the formers appoint a gang to beat up ajay brutally and leave him for dead on the street. soon ajay recovers from his injuries and enters varma's mansion. an enraged ajay challenges varma to get back ayesha at any cost. verma too keeps a condition, if within 24 hours he didn't get back to ayesha, he will have to get out of her life forever. ajay accepts this deal. chopra again plans a conspiracy and arrests ajay without any crime.
the police inspector (aashif sheikh) first beats ajay and the inspector gets equally beaten up brutally and ajay runs from the jail. now chopra calls chhote to kill ajay and promises to give him loads of money but chhote replies that ramadan is ended and bhaijaan will finish ajay. this conversation gets taped by ayesha's little sister. ajay gets surrounded by henchmen and knocks each one but interrupted by bhaijaan. just before bhaijaan is about to kill ajay, the former says he is a lover and will die once. this made bhaijaan save ajay. the reason was bhaijaan had a brother irfan who committed suicide because bhaijaan didn't care for his love feelings.
during eid ul fitr bhaijaan thanks allah for giving a boy like ajay in turn of his deceased brother and decides to help him. the very day, ajay arrives at the verma's mansion within 24 hours and decides to stop the wedding of raman and ayesha. bhaijaan, who has a change of heart and helps him but soon interrupted by chhote. chhote disobeys bhaijaan and soon a fight ensues. bhaijaan requests ajay to go but he is beaten up badly. ajay interrupts wedding and points gun on verma. soon ajay and ayesha get married. just about verma is about to kill ajay, mini plays the tape of the deal to her father and soon chopra and raman are kicked off. bhaijaan kills all the henchmen and finally slits munna and chhote with a sword. the film ends on a happy note with ayesha and ajay are united and bhaijaan reconciles with ajay.


== cast ==
sohail khan as ajay
sameera reddy as ayesha verma
sanjay dutt as bhaijaan
kabir bedi as mr. varma
dalip tahil as mr. chopra
amrita prakash as mini (ayesha's sister)
neeraj vora as principal/pandit
rajpal yadav as munna
sarfaraz khan as chhote
raja bherwani as chopras son
bobby darling
sikandar kharbanda as head of warriors' team
eijaz khan as ejaz
nirmal shah as chhotu
vikas sharma as vicky
sadanand yadav as sada
aashif sheikh as inspector
manoj bhidwai
qamar naqvi
nischaiy sachdev
fardeen ibrahim
rajat gowda


== soundtrack ==
the lyrics for the film were penned by faaiz anwar, salim bijnori, gufi paintal, jalees & rashid, while the music was composed by dabboo malik.


== critical reception ==
taran adarsh rated the film 2 out of 5, praising the acting and direction. sukanya verma from rediff.com criticised the film, terming it as "you can be forgiven for mistaking the actors".


== references ==


== external links ==
maine dil tujhko diya at imdb