maine pyar kiya (transl.i loved) is an 1989 indian hindi-language romantic musical film directed and co-written by sooraj barjatya. it starring salman khan and bhagyashree in their acting debut, with alok nath, mohnish bahl, reema lagoo, rajeev verma, ajit vachani and laxmikant berde in supporting roles. the story revolves around prem and suman. suman is the daughter of a poor mechanic karan who leaves her with his rich friend kishan before going abroad. suman is befriended by kishan's son prem and they fall in love.
the film released on 29 december 1989. produced by rajshri productions on a budget of 20 million, maine pyar kiya emerged as a major critical and commercial success, with a lifetime worldwide gross of 308.1 million at the box office, becoming the highest-grossing bollywood film of the year and the highest-grossing indian film of the 1980s. it was declared an all time blockbuster by box office india catapulting the leads to fame. the film garnered positive reviews from critics upon its release, with sooraj barjatya's direction, the story, and the performances earning critical praise. the film has 11-song soundtrack, an unusually large number, with popular singer lata mangeshkar lending her voice for 8 of the 11 songs in the film.
maine pyar kiya won 6 filmfare awards, including best film, best music director, best lyricist, best male playback singer, best male debut, and best female debut. the film was dubbed into telugu as "prema paavuraalu" and ran for more than 200 days there. it was also dubbed into tamil and malayalam language and released with the title kaadhal oru kavithai and ina praavukal respectively.


== plot ==
karan is a poor mechanic who lives in the countryside with his only daughter, suman. he decides to try his luck in business and travel to dubai so he can earn enough to get his daughter married. thus, he decides to leave her with his old friend kishan. kishan, a wealthy businessman, allows suman to stay at his house while her father is away as he cannot turn down his old friend's request. suman is befriended by kishan's young son prem, who assures her that a boy and a girl can be platonic friends.
prem takes suman to a party organised by seema, who is the only daughter of kishan's business partner, ranjeet. jeevan, nephew of ranjeet, is proud and arrogant and humiliates suman and prem, accusing them of falsely claiming to be "just friends". suman leaves the party in tears and distances herself from prem. at that point, prem and suman both realise that they have fallen in love with each other.
prem's mother kaushalya probes deeper into prem and suman's relationship and approves of suman as her daughter-in-law. kishan, however, is unhappy with the relationship and asks her to leave his house. he feels that she has taken advantage of his hospitality. karan returns from abroad and is enraged at kishan's behaviour and kishan accuses him of plotting to set up prem and suman. karan and kishan quarrel, and eventually karan and suman return to their village, deeply humiliated.
prem refuses to accept the separation, so he goes to suman's village and begs to be allowed to marry her. karan, angered by kishan's accusations, says he will allow the marriage on one condition: prem must prove that he can support his wife through his own effort and live separately. prem begins to work as a truck driver and laborer in the nearby quarry. at the end of the month, prem has earned the required money. on the way to karan's house, he is ambushed by jeevan and a group of ruffians who attempt to kill him. he survives, but his wages are ruined in the fight.
karan harshly dismisses prem's effort and cannot believe prem's story about the ruffians' attack. prem begs for another chance to prove himself. his sincere determination melts karan's heart and he agrees to allow his daughter to marry prem. meanwhile, ranjeet goes to prem's father and tells him that karan has killed his son. unable to believe this, kishan travels to karan's village, only to find prem alive.
when prem confronts jeevan, ranjeet and his supporters beat up both kishan and karan, while jeevan abducts suman. in the end, prem, karan, and kishan join hands to defeat a common enemy  ranjeet, his nephew jeevan and ranjeet's supporters, and then save suman. karan and kishan's estrangement comes to an end and prem and suman marry.


== cast ==
salman khan as prem choudhary
bhagyashree as suman shrestha
alok nath as karawar "karan" shrestha, suman's father
rajeev verma as kishan kumar choudhary, prem's father
reema lagoo as kaushalya choudhary, prem's mother
ajit vachani as ranjeet sehni, kishan's business partner
harish patel as rahim chacha
huma khan as gulabiya
pervin dastur as seema sehni, ranjeet's daughter
laxmikant berde as manohar
mohnish bahl as jeevan sehni, ranjeet's nephew
dilip joshi as ramu
deep dhillon as lal miyan, truck driver
raju shrivastava as shambu, cleaner
shreechand makhija as mr prabhu, company office employee


== production ==
prior to the film's production, rajshri productions was struggling financially, and was on the verge of closing down. director/writer sooraj barjatya's father rajkumar barjatya suggested the story of maine pyar kiya. barjatya spent ten months writing the screenplay for maine pyar kiya.the casting of the lead actor was complex. barjatya tested shabina dutt for the lead actress role. dutt failed the screen test and barjatya asked if she could suggest an actor for the lead. she suggested salman khan, with whom she had done an ad film. salman khan was not particularly interested because of the soft nature of the film. barjatya eventually convinced him to do it, and khan has since then expressed his gratitude to barjatya for making him a star. barjatya then cast bhagyashree to star opposite salman khan. barjatya picked perveen from the english stage to play the negative role.the first sequence filmed was the office scene where rajiv verma tells salman that he has to go. barjatya had large sets in film city, mumbai, where filming took place continuously over 5 to 6 months. the outdoor scenes were filmed in ooty. additional production credits include: dance choreographer  jay borade, artbijon das gupta, actionshamim azim and editormukhtar ahmed.the film had a production budget of 2 crore (equivalent to 17 crore or us$2.4 million in 2019). salman khan was paid 31,000 (equivalent to 270,000 or us$3,700 in 2019) for the film. in addition to the production budget, another 10 lakh (equivalent to 86 lakh or us$120,000 in 2019) was spent on the soundtrack's radio publicity.


== release ==
maine pyar kiya premiered on 29 december 1989 across india. the film initially saw a very limited release, with only 29 prints, before later going on to add a thousand more as the film picked up.maine pyar kiya was dubbed in english as when love calls. a 125-minute version was the biggest hit in the caribbean market in guyana and also dominated the box-office collections in trinidad and tobago. the telugu version prema paavuraalu ran for 25 weeks at visakhapatnam and had 100 plus day run at six centres in andhra pradesh. it was dubbed in tamil language as kaadhal oru kavithai and in malayalam as ina praavukal. maine pyar kiya had also been dubbed in spanish as te amo. the film also had a 10-week premiere run in lima.


=== box office ===
the film was the biggest grosser of 1989 and one of india's highest-grossing films. made on a budget of around 2 crore, it went on to earn a profit of over 20 crore by 1990, saving rajshri from closing down.maine pyar kiya grossed 28 crore ($17 million), equivalent to 500 crore ($71 million) adjusted for inflation in 2017. it became the highest-grossing indian film of the 1980s. in terms of ticket sales, the film is estimated to have sold at least 30 million tickets in india.box office india described it as an "all-time blockbuster". the film's success drew comparisons to sholay, with manmohan desai even calling maine pyar kiya "the biggest hit since alam ara" (1931). maine pyar kiya was immensely popular, becoming one of the highest-earning films up to that point and is considered to be a film of global significance, a trendsetter, and one of the most successful films of indian cinema.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack album and musical score were composed by raamlaxman, while the lyrics were written by dev kohli and asad bhopali. it was produced under the saregama label and featured singers such as lata mangeshkar, s. p. balasubrahmanyam and sharda sinha. the soundtrack consists of 11 songs including the "antakshri" (excerpts from different bollywood songs), which was used when the characters play a game. the soundtrack was very successful upon release, becoming the best-selling bollywood soundtrack of the decade. the film's soundtrack album sold over 10 million units. it was listed by planet bollywood as number 5 on their list of 100 greatest bollywood soundtracks.priyankee saikia of mensxp.com described several songs as "heavily influenced by western hits", noting that "aate jaate hanste gaate" was derivative of stevie wonder's "i just called to say i love you" and "aaya mausam dosti ka" featured parts similar to "tarzan boy" by baltimora, specifically the latter's millennial whoop. the song "mere rang mein rangne wali" is based on "the final countdown" by the swedish band europe and "theme from love story".


=== telugu soundtrack (dubbed) ===
the film was dubbed into telugu with the title prema paavuraalu which ran very successfully. the soundtrack was also released in telugu, which received positive reviews. the track list featured singers from the telugu film industry such as s. p. balasubrahmanyam, k. s. chitra and mano. the music was composed by raamlaxman. the track list featured nine songs from the original; two songs were cut off. all the lyrics were penned by rajashri.


=== tamil soundtrack (dubbed) ===
the film was dubbed into tamil with the title kadhal oru kavithai, which ran successfully. the soundtrack was also released in tamil. the track list, like that of the telugu soundtrack, featured singers s. p. balasubrahmanyam, k. s. chitra and mano. the music was composed by raamlaxman. the track list featured 9 songs from the original; 2 songs were cut off. all the lyrics were penned by vaali.


== awards and nominations ==


== influence ==
the film is said to be an inspiration to 2005 telugu blockbuster nuvvostanante nenoddantana directed by prabhu deva. there were remakes produced in seven other languages including tamil, hindi and kannada. salman khan's film pyaar kiya to darna kya was partially inspired by this movie.


== note ==


== references ==


== external links ==
maine pyar kiya at imdb