make mine a million is a 1959 british comedy film directed by lance comfort, starring arthur askey, sid james, and bernard cribbins. the film parodies the stuffiness of the 1950s bbc and the effect of television advertising in the era.


== plot ==
arthur ashton (in a parody of himself, arthur askey) is a makeup man working for national television (a parody of the bbc). during a visit to the local launderette, he meets sid gibson (sid james), a shady pedlar who is trying to flog bonko, a brand of washing powder in the shape of a pill. the man cannot afford to advertise on tv, but wishes to do so. the fairly clueless arthur agrees to help him, and they manage to plug an advert for bonko on national television by interrupting the live feed.
this causes quite a stir amongst the national television heads, who have arthur fired. however, the advert proves extremely popular and demand for the product soars.
after repeating the stunt at ascot races, sid, realising that this is potentially a huge moneymaker, does a deal with an advertising executive and, with arthur's help, they plug cake mix at the edinburgh tattoo. next arthur materialises on stage during a production of swan lake.
after a narrow escape, arthur wants to quit, but sid persuades him to do one final jobinterrupting a press conference between the british prime minister and the american president. on the way, the post office van they are using is hijacked by criminals. arthur, who is in the back of the van, contacts the police using his broadcast system, to thwart the robbery, leading to the final barnyard showdown. in the end, arthur, now a hero and celebrity, gets his own tv show, brokered by sid, of course.


== cast ==
arthur askey - arthur ashton
sid james - sid gibson
dermot walsh - martin russell
olga lindo - mrs. burgess
clive morton - director general
sally barnes - sally
george margo - assistant
lionel murton - commercial tv director
bernard cribbins - jack
kenneth connor - anxious husband
barbara windsor - switchboard operator
martin benson - chairman
david nettheim - professor
bruce seton - superintendent james
tommy trinder  - himself, cameo appearance
dickie henderson - himself, cameo appearance
evelyn laye - herself, cameo appearance
dennis lotis - himself, cameo appearance
anthea askey - herself, cameo appearance
raymond glendenning - himself, cameo appearance
patricia bredin - herself, cameo appearance
leonard weir - himself, cameo appearance
sabrina - herself, cameo appearance
gillian lynne - herself, cameo appearance
peter noble -   himself, cameo appearance as tv host
prince monolulu - himself, cameo appearance
leigh madison - diana
sam kydd - mail van robber
edwin richfield - plainclothes policeman
bill shine - outside broadcast producer
gordon jackson - non-speaking role as leader of the pipe band (uncredited)


== reception ==
the radio times guide to films gives the film three stars out of five, describing it as a "pacey romp".


== references ==


== external links ==
make mine a million at imdb
make mine a million at british comedy guide