makeup man is a 2011 malayalam comedy film directed by shafi. the film stars jayaram, sheela, siddique and suraj venjarammoodu in the lead roles, with kunchako boban and prithviraj appearing in guest roles. vidyasagar composed the music, with lyrics penned by kaithapram. the tumultuous life of a couple, after the wife becomes a heroine just by chance and the husband is forced to disguise himself as her makeup man, is being told here. the core plot of the movie was loosely based on the 2001 french movie my wife is an actress.


== plot ==
balachandran is arrested by police by mistaking him to be a house breaker, while entering his own home in middle of a night. he explains his pathetic financial situation to the police inspector, including his huge debts and love affair with soorya. after seeing him reluctant to take up her calls, the police inspector advises him to approach life positively by accepting her into his life. but balu explains him that it is her marriage on the next morning and he is unable to bear the pain by talking to her. upon the request of the inspector, balu takes up her call, and comes to know that she is now waiting for him at the railway station. balu arrives at the railway station and meets her. with the help of kitchu manjaly, a production controller in film industry, balu marries soorya at a temple in the same morning. kitchu arranges a room for them to spend a night in the same hotel where a film crew was residing. paul, the film producer mistakes her to be the new heroine for the film and kitchu to play things safe makes him believe so. paul calls up sidharth, the film director and cameraman to conduct a screen test on the same night. though reluctant, soorya and balu has no option left. soorya appears for the screen test and is successfully selected as the new heroine. balu plays it safe by claiming her personal make up man and appears on the set the next day. soorya is re christianed as anamika. during the shoot, siddharth develops a soft feeling towards her, and finds balu's interference as a nuisance. he tries all ways to belittle him and asks anamika to dump him away. slowly, the fever of stardom catches up anamika, who is also cast for the next film by siddharth, which balu objects. to make things worse, her father arrives on the set along with her fiance to patch up things. things get worsened between balu and anamika, and he quits from the set. up on the release of the film, anamika tries to patch up balu, but he publicly humiliates her. upon realizing his mistake, in a bid to sort out issues, he lands up in hyderabad where anamika is acting as the heroine of prithviraj sukumaran. there  balu is the make up man of chandra, the second heroine. sidharth is again disturbed by seeing him and tries all ways to kick him out, but all in vain. prithviraj understanding balu's issues with anamika from kitchu decides to help him with the support of chandra. after the pack up, on reaching back in kochi, balu is arrested by police for financial forgery. siddharth, by realizing the relation between balu and soorya decides to play a dirty game to own her. he files a case on her behalf against her for which balu files back another one. the legal fight and how balu patches up with soorya forms the rest of the story.


== cast ==
jayaram as balachandran (balu)
sheela as surya / anamika
siddique as sidharth, film director
suraj venjaramoodu as kichu, production controller
jagathi sreekumar as vareeth mappila
prithviraj sukumaran as himself (guest role)
kunchacko boban as himself (guest role)
kamna jethmalani as chandra (guest role)
janardhanan as paul, film producer
jagadish as advocate mathai
ranjith rajaputhra as ranjith, camera man
salim kumar as lawrance
babu namboothiri as soorya's father
baiju santhosh
saiju kurup as soorya's fiance
kalpana
shammi thilakan as police officer
appahaja as police inspector
t.p madhavan as judge
devan as john kuruvila
krishna kumar as adv. krishna prasad
nimisha


== soundtrack ==

this album was composed by vidyasagar in 2011. all lyrics were written by kaithapram damodaran namboothiri.


== box office ==
the film made at a budget of 4.5 crore got a distributor's share of 3.04 crore and a satellite right for 2.25 crore. the film was a "superhit" at the box office.


== references ==


== external links ==
makeup man at imdb
oneindia article
nowrunning article
indiaglitz article
mallumovies.org article