malappuram haji mahanaya joji (transl.malappuram haji, the great joji) is a 1994 indian malayalam-language comedy film screen play and directed by thulasidas and dialogues by rajan kiriyath and vinu kiriyath from a story by babu g. nair. the film stars mukesh, siddique, madhu, jagathy sreekumar, and maathu. the music for the film was composed by johnson. malappuram haji mahanaya joji was a commercial success at the box office.


== plot ==
kunjalikutty gets both a visa to dubai and a job offer at a school managed by his father's friend, malappuram hajiyar in malappuram at the same time. his father refuses to let him go to dubai and wants him to take the teaching job. so kunjalikutty sends his friend joji, a handsome and well-educated hindu, in his place to the school, and goes to dubai without his parents knowledge.
malappuram hajiyar is a bold and religious man having a huge public appeal, with no tolerance towards deception. thus people approach him with awe. hajiyar's code of conduct scares joji to the core that he has to conceal his own identity while living as kunjalikkutty's impostor. a hilariously hostile relationship develops between joji and aliyar, who is the physical education teacher, and later, joji's roommate. joji soon gets into the good books of hajiyar, while aliyar remains stuck in the rut of being too slack for a teacher, for instance, coming late for the school.
things do not go easy for joji. he nearly blew his cover at times, which triggers aliyar's suspicion. on one such occasion, he is accidentally confronted by gouri, who hails from a reputed hindu family. the story enters a serious turn, when kunjalikutty shows up, telling joji that he has become a victim of a visa scam run by jafer khan, who now targets kunjalikutty for extermination.
unable to face his own strict father, while avoiding jafer khan's goons, kunjalikutty decides to stay with joji, as joji. thus kunjalikutty and joji lives together with aliyar, under swapped identities. aliyar, who cannot stand joji further, becomes desperate to get into the bottom of things.


== cast ==
mukesh as joji / jonakkapparambil jithendra varma
siddique as kunjalikkutty
madhu as malappuram hajiyar
jagathy sreekumar as physical education instructor aliyar
narendra prasad as kuruppu
maathu as gouri, joji's fiance
meera as mumtaz, hajiyar's daughter
prem kumar as sukumaran
usha as sukumaran's wife, premalatha
karamana janardanan nair as kunjalikkutty's father
indrans as sankaran
rizabawa as jaffar khan
santha devi as kunjalikutty's mother
bobby kottarakkara
kozhikode narayanan nair as beerankutty
jose pellissery as mukundan menon, school headmaster
santhakumari as joji's mother
meghanathan as veeran
kalabhavan haneef as khader


== soundtrack ==
music: johnson; lyrics: bichu thirumala

"maanam mutte" m. g. sreekumar, sujatha, c. o. anto
"penkiliye" g. venugopal, k. s. chithra


== references ==


== external links ==
malappuram haji mahanaya joji at imdb
malappuram haji mahanaya joji at the malayalam movie database