malibu express is a 1985 american action/adventure film starring darby hinton, sybil danning, lori sutton, and art metrano. it was directed, written, and produced by andy sidaris and is the first installment in the triple-b series. the film features 1980s playboy playmates kimberly mcarthur, barbara edwards, lorraine michaels, and lynda wiesmeier in its cast, as well. in it, danning "cinched her image as b-budget bad girl". regis and joy philbin cameo as talk show hosts.


== synopsis ==
espionage threatens the security of american computer technology and a skirt-chasing private investigator is assigned by federal intelligence agencies to root out the spies among the rich, oversexed socialites unknowingly supporting them.


== plot summary ==
a wealthy playboy/private-investigator named cody abilene is hired by a government intelligence operative to investigate a lead into who is selling computer technology to the russians. while investigating rich socialites, amorous naked vixens, an ex-con with a penchant for blackmail, and keeping it all from his sexy lady cop friend beverly mcafee, cody puts himself in the crosshairs of  the traitorous tech-spies who will gladly kill to stay in business.
the scope of the conspiracy is revealed after cody and beverly make love at a suspect's beachhouse, only to find a pair of hitmen gunning for them as they get dressed. gunplay, car chases, and races ensue.


== cast ==
darby hinton as cody abilene
sybil danning as contessa luciana
art metrano as matthew
niki dantine as lady lillian chamberlain
michael a. andrews as stuart chamberlain (as michael andrews)
shelley taylor morgan as anita chamberlain
lorraine michaels as liza chamberlain
brett baxter clark as shane (as brett clark)
lori sutton as beverly mcafee
lynda wiesmeier as june khnockers
kimberly mcarthur as faye
barbara edwards as may
abb dickson as p. l. buffington
busty o'shea as doreen buffington
randy rudy as bobo buffington
richard brose as mark
john brown as luke
suzanne m. regard as sexy sally (as suzanne regard)
john alderman as lieutenant arledge
robyn hilton as maid marian
les steinmetz as johnathan harper
robert darnell as douglas wilton
jeanine vargas as rodney, the photographer
peter knecht as peter
harry hauss as helicopter pilot
ruth stamer as answering service girl
peggy ann filsinger as peggy from health club
regis philbin as regis philbin
joy philbin as joy philbin
niki patterson as computer operator


== soundtrack ==
the film's music was composed by henry strzelecki, with ronny light producing the soundtrack which featured strzelecki on bass, bucky barrett and tommy jones on guitar,  bobby thompson playing guitar and banjo,  weldon myrick playing guitar and dobro, barry walsh on piano,  dale morris on fiddle,  terry mcmillan on harmonica and percussion, and kenny buttrey on drums.


== reception ==
malibu express is described as a "routine erotic spy tale" by eleanor mannikka of all movie guide. the video movie guide 2001 rated the movie with a single "turkey",  amazed that the movie got an "r" rating, "since it's clearly soft porn." tv guide gave the film two stars.  barbara edwards'  appearance in the hero's shower is cited as "one of the hottest topless lesbian shower scenes in the long and hot tradition of lesbian shower scenes."


== filming locations ==
beverly hills
sunset boulevard in los angeles
willow springs raceway (north of los angeles)
mojave desert


== releases ==
the film was first released in march 1985, then on dvd in 2002. it then appeared in two dvd collections, andy sidaris collection, vol. 1 (of six discs) in 2003, and triple b collection, vol. 1 in 2005.


== connections to other films ==
the material from the film was reworked from a previous sidaris film, stacey (1973). the role of stacey hanson (anne randall) was divided into two new characters: private detective protagonist cody abilene (darby hinton) and his girlfriend june khnockers (lynda wiesmeier).the openings of both films depict their respective female race car drivers in the finish of a practice race. both films then have them getting out of uniform.  stacey is the protagonist, though, while june serves mostly as the source of a recurring joke in her film: "knockers with an "h"?". june can still reliably drive a high-performance race car, but cody performs most of stacey's functions in the film.the discreet homosexual nephew john (john alderman) turns into stuart (michael a. anderson), a drag queen, in the second film. in both films, the detective follows the character into a gay bar. the difference is that in the first film, john wears regular clothes, while in the second, stuart is in full drag. cody laughs while dictating notes into a recorder, but still admits that stuart has great legs. stuart is more of a cartoonish gay stereotype than john.the youthful niece pamela (cristina raines) turns into the bit older niece liza (lorraine michaels) in the second film. liza has her own sex scene with the houseboy shane (brett clark). the difference in age was probably decided to allow this sex scene and more nudity than would be acceptable from a teenager.the second film adds a character with no counterpart in the original: contessa luciana (sybil danning). contessa has a romantic night with cody, before he moves into his next assignment. the relationship to the family is unspecified, but she turns out to have murdered shane. she is beyond the reach of the law and suffers no ill consequences for her murder.


== see also ==
girls with guns


== references ==


== external links ==
malibu express at imdb
malibu express on nanarland