mammon  in the new testament of the bible is commonly thought to mean money, material wealth, or any entity that promises wealth, and is associated with the greedy pursuit of gain. the gospel of matthew and the gospel of luke both quote jesus using the word in a phrase often rendered in english as "you cannot serve both god and mammon."
in the middle ages it was often personified and sometimes included in the seven princes of hell.
mammon in hebrew () means "money". the word was adopted to modern hebrew to mean wealth.


== etymology ==
the word mammon comes into english from post-classical latin mammona "wealth", used most importantly in the vulgate bible (along with tertullian's mammonas and pseudo-jerome's mammon). this was in turn borrowed from hellenistic greek , which appears in the new testament, borrowed from aramaic   mmn, an emphatic form of the word mmn "wealth, profit", perhaps specifically from the syriac dialect. the spelling  refers to "a syrian deity, god of riches; hence riches, wealth";  is transliterated from aramaic [] and also means "wealth". however, it is not clear what the earlier history of the aramaic form is. the word may have been present throughout the canaanite languages: the word is unknown in old testament hebrew, but has been found in the qumran documents; post-biblical hebrew attests to mmn; and, according to st augustine of hippo, punic included the word mammon "profit". it has been suggested that the aramaic word mmn was a loanword from mishnaic hebrew  (mamn) meaning money, wealth, or possessions; although it may also have meant "that in which one trusts".according to the textus receptus of the new testament, the greek word translated "mammon" is spelt  in the sermon on the mount at matthew 6:24, and  (from ) in the parable of the unjust steward at luke 16:9,11,13. the 27th edition of the popular critical text of the new testament has  in all four places with no indication of any textual variances, thereby ignoring the textus receptus reading at matthew 6:24. the liddell and scott lexicon has a listing for each spelling, indicating that each occurs only in the new testament, nowhere else in ancient and hellenistic greek literature. the spelling  refers to "a syrian deity, god of riches; hence riches, wealth";  is transliterated from aramaic [] and also means "wealth". the authorised version uses "mammon" for both greek spellings; john wycliffe uses richessis.
the revised standard version of the bible explains it as "a semitic word for money or riches". the international children's bible (icb) uses the wording "you cannot serve god and money at the same time".christians began to use "mammon" as a pejorative, a term that was used to describe gluttony, excessive materialism, greed, and unjust worldly gain.

lay not up for yourselves treasures upon earth, where moth and rust doth corrupt, and where thieves break through and steal: but lay up for yourselves treasures in heaven, where neither moth nor rust doth corrupt, and where thieves do not break through nor steal: for where your treasure is, there will your heart be also. no man can serve two masters: for either he will hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one, and despise the other. ye cannot serve god and mammon.
early mentions of mammon allude to the gospels, e.g., didascalia, "de solo mammona cogitant, quorum deus est sacculus"; and saint augustine, "lucrum punice mammon dicitur" (sermon on the mount, ii).


== personifications ==
gregory of nyssa also asserted that mammon was another name for beelzebub.in the 4th century cyprian and jerome relate mammon to greed and greed as an evil master that enslaves, and john chrysostom even personifies mammon as greed.during the middle ages, mammon was commonly personified as the demon of wealth and greed. thus peter lombard (ii, dist. 6) says, "riches are called by the name of a devil, namely mammon, for mammon is the name of a devil, by which name riches are called according to the syrian tongue." piers plowman also regards mammon as a deity. nicholas de lyra, commenting on the passage in luke, says: "mammon est nomen daemonis" (mammon is the name of a demon).
albert barnes in his notes on the new testament states that mammon was a syriac word for an idol worshipped as the god of riches, similar to plutus among the greeks, but he cited no authority for the statement.no trace, however, of any syriac god of such a name exists, and the common literary identification of the name with a god of covetousness or avarice likely stems from spenser's the faerie queene, where mammon oversees a cave of worldly wealth. milton's paradise lost describes a fallen angel who values earthly treasure over all other things.  later occultist writings such as jacques collin de plancy's dictionnaire infernal describe mammon as hell's ambassador to england. for thomas carlyle in past and present, the "gospel of mammonism" became simply a metaphoric personification for the materialist spirit of the 19th century.
mammon is somewhat similar to the greek god plutus, and the roman dis pater, in his description, and it is likely that he was at some point based on them; especially since plutus appears in the divine comedy as a wolf-like demon of wealth, wolves having been associated with greed in the middle ages. thomas aquinas metaphorically described the sin of avarice as "mammon being carried up from hell by a wolf, coming to inflame the human heart with greed".
under the influence of the social gospel movement american populists, progressives and "muck-rakers" during the generation of 1880-1925 used "mammon" with specific reference to the consolidated wealth and power of the banking and corporate institutions headquartered on wall street and their predatory activities nationwide.


== in various countries ==
"mamona" (sometimes "mamuna") is a synonym for mammon among slavs.  in the 21st century, the word "mamona" is used figuratively and derogatorily in polish as a synonym of money. in slovak the word mamonr is sometimes used to refer to a greedy person. on the other hand, in russian, the word "" is used as a slang word to describe one's obese belly.
the word "mammona" is quite often used in the finnish and estonian languages as a synonym of material wealth.
in german, the word "mammon" is a colloquial and contemptuous term for "money". usually as a phrase in combination with the adjective "schnde" ("der schnde mammon" = the contemptible mammon).


== in popular culture ==

various characters and demons are named mammon in books, film, tv, anime, and video games. he is also portrayed as a demon in the dungeons & dragons role-playing game.


== see also ==

asceticism
christian demons in popular culture
christian views on poverty and wealth
evangelical counsels
jewish views of poverty, wealth and charity
prosperity theology
seven deadly sins
vow of poverty


== references ==


== external links ==
"mamon" at the catholic encyclopedia
"mamon" at the jewish encyclopedia
"mamon" at the encyclopdia britannica