man up is a 2015 romantic comedy film directed by ben palmer from a screenplay written by tess morris, starring lake bell and simon pegg. the film follows a single 34-year-old woman (bell), who after being mistaken for a stranger's blind date, finds the perfect boyfriend in a 40-year-old divorc (pegg). the film was released in the united kingdom on 29 may 2015 by studiocanal.


== plot ==
nancy is 34 years old and has been single for four years. she is pessimistic about love, but her sister hopes that nancy can find it and encourages her to "put herself out there." nancy has an awkward blind date at her friend's engagement party.
nancy takes the train to london to attend her parents' 40th anniversary celebration. on the train, nancy sits across from jessica, a bubbly 24-year-old woman who is going on a blind date based on a self-help book called 6 billion people and you. nancy is rude to jessica so, when nancy falls asleep, jessica leaves behind her copy of the book, bookmarking chapter 7, your negative thoughts are ruining your life (and everyone else's...). at london waterloo station, nancy pursues jessica to return the book, but is stopped by jack, jessica's blind date, who thinks she is jessica because of the book. before nancy  can explain she is not, the nervous jack charms her with his rambling introduction. she decides to take a chance and pretend to be jessica, and they have a good time drinking and bowling, but nancy's ruse is exposed when they run into her creepy secondary school acquaintance, sean.
nancy and an angry jack argue and return to the bar to retrieve his bag and her notebook, where they run into hilary, jack's soon-to-be-ex-wife, with ed, the man she left him for. nancy goes along with jack's own ruse when he pretends she is his girlfriend. the presence of the self-assured nancy irritates hilary, but nancy ends up consoling jack in the bathroom, where she shares the story of her own ex and helps him achieve closure.
nancy wants to invite jack to her parents' anniversary party  but jessica has left telephone messages for jack and still wants to meet up, so he parts ways with nancy. nancy arrives at her parents' party but is downhearted about the parting, while jack, who has found he has little in common with jessica, also quickly realises that letting her go was a mistake. after jessica  who is pleased about jack and nancy's "love story" because it supports her optimistic view of the world  sees him off in a taxi, he enlists the help of sean and some teenagers (sean sent jack to the wrong house and went off to try his luck with nancy himself  to little avail  but one of the teenagers knew where she lived and they all went there together) to find nancy's house and they decide to take a chance on each other.


== cast ==
lake bell as nancy
simon pegg as jack
sharon horgan as elaine
rory kinnear as sean
ken stott as bert
harriet walter as fran
ophelia lovibond as jessica
olivia williams as hilary
stephen campbell moore as ed
henry lloyd-hughes as daniel
dean-charles chapman as harry
robert wilfort as ryan
john bradley as andy (room service)
phoebe waller-bridge as katie (engagement party)
paul thornley as adam


== production ==
in june 2013, it was announced simon pegg had joined the big talk production, co-starring as the romantic interest. on 19 november 2013 lake bell joined the cast as the film's lead, with the inbetweeners director ben palmer set to direct. the film received funding from bbc films, with anton capital entertainment and amazon prime instant video joining as minor production partners. studiocanal distributed the film.olivia williams, rory kinnear, stephen campbell moore, sharon horgan, harriet walter, and ken stott joined the cast of the film during the filming. principal photography began on 20 january 2014 in london.


== release ==
man up was released theatrically in the united kingdom on 29 may 2015 by studiocanal following its premiere at the 2015 tribeca film festival on 19 april. the film was released in the united states by saban films on 13 november 2015.
the film received positive reviews from critics. on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film has an 80% "certified fresh" rating based on 79 reviews, with an average rating of 6.25/10. the site's consensus states: "thanks to fine performances from lake bell and simon pegg, man up largely strikes the deceptively difficult balance between romance and comedy." on metacritic, the film holds a 69 out of 100 rating, based on 16 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".
as of november, 2020 the film is being presented on youtube free movies.


== references ==


== external links ==
man up at imdb
man up at box office mojo
man up at rotten tomatoes
man up at metacritic