man about town is a 2006 comedy-drama film produced by sunlight productions and independently presented by media 8 entertainment. it was written and directed by mike binder and stars ben affleck, rebecca romijn, john cleese, bai ling, and jerry o'connell in the los angeles area where the film was set.
in the united states, it was released direct-to-dvd on february 13, 2007; however, the film was theatrically released in many countries around the world.


== plot ==
top hollywood talent agent, jack giamoro (ben affleck) seems to have it all: a successful career, a lot of money, a nice car, a beautiful wife, etc. however, while pursuing success, he somehow lost himself and neglected his marriage. he decides to take a journal writing class to do some self-searching. jack's seemingly perfect world starts to unravel when he learns that his wife, nina (rebecca romijn), is cheating on him with his most important client. things get worse when barbi (bai ling), an ambitious journalist, steals jack's journal, which contains secrets that could ruin him personally and professionally. jack is forced to fight for everything he has worked so hard to achieve and in doing so, he attains the self-insight he was looking for. by realizing that there is more to life than work, he begins to focus on what's most important in his life.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
"basic instinct"  written by jerry goldsmith
"cucurrucucu paloma"  written by toms mndez; arranged and performed by fredo viola
"i got it"  written by john krautner and robert harlow; performed by the go
"our lips are sealed"  written by terrence edward hall and jane wiedlin; arranged and performed by fredo viola
"red states"  written and performed by fredo viola
"the sad song"  written and performed by fredo viola


== home media ==
lionsgate entertainment distributed the film on dvd in the us.  the dvd included the bonus features "visual journaling", "talk to my agent", deleted scenes, and bloopers.  it contained a 169 widescreen version, 5.1 and 2.0 dolby digital audio, english and spanish subtitles, and english closed captions.


== external links ==
man about town at imdb
amc filmcritic
man about town at rotten tomatoes
yahoo! movies