man of the world is a 1931 american pre-code romantic drama directed by richard wallace and starring william powell, carole lombard, and wynne gibson.
the story is about a young american girl who visits paris accompanied by her fianc and her wealthy uncle. there she meets and is romanced by a worldly novelist; what she does not know is that he is a blackmailer who is using her to get to her uncle.


== plot ==
in 1930's paris, american michael trevor (william powell) poses as a novelist but is actually a former newspaper man who took the blame for some scam in the united states and had to leave the country. embittered, he now prints a weekly scandal sheet and blackmails expatriates to keep their names out of his rag. while extorting $2000 from the wealthy harry taylor (guy kibbee) (a scam done so smoothly that harry thinks michael has done him a big favor), michael meets harry's niece, mary kendall (carole lombard), and the two feel an instant mutual attraction. mary has a boyfriend, frank reynolds (lawrence gray), but she is not passionate about him. michael's partners in crime are irene hoffa (wynne gibson) and fred (george chandler). irene is a former flame who is still not over michael. she needs money to keep her brother out of prison and proposes that they extort more money from harry by embroiling mary in a scandal. michael resists - he has a rule never to target women - but then reluctantly agrees.
while frank is away on business, michael spends time with mary and they fall in love. she tries to end it in a letter to frank, but is unable to finish it. michael tells her his life story. mary says that it is all in the past; they love each other and nothing else matters. michael tells irene that he and mary are going to be married and that he is done with his life of crime. irene says that someday his past will come out and mary will then be the wife of a criminal. these words weigh on michael and he realizes that, for mary's sake, he cannot marry her.
michael tells harry that he was behind the earlier scam and demands a further $10,000 or he will print a piece about his planned wedding to mary. harry is angry and mary is hurt and confused, but michael is determined to go ahead with his scheme. harry pays him off with a check and mary collapses in tears. after seeing how much michael cares for mary, irene decides to instead get the money needed for her brother by selling her jewelry. she also tells the police that michael is behind the scandal sheet and they give him 24 hours to leave france. mary and frank sail back to pittsburgh, a conspicuous engagement ring on her hand. michael heads to cape town, and agrees to let irene come along. aboard ship, he tears up the $10,000 check.


== cast ==
william powell as michael trevor
carole lombard as mary kendall
wynne gibson as irene hoffa
lawrence gray as frank reynolds
guy kibbee as harry taylor
george chandler as fred
andr cheron as victor (uncredited)
harvey clark as joe, an american tourist (uncredited)
tom costello as spade henderson (uncredited)
tom ricketts as mr. bradkin (uncredited)
rolfe sedan as hotel desk clerk (uncredited)
maude truax as mrs. jowitt (uncredited)


== reception ==
the new york times critic mordaunt hall described the film as "a rather interesting but scarcely credible story ... but withal, aside from a few somewhat tedious stretches, it is a tale that inveigles one's attention."


== dvd release ==
this film is currently available as part of the dvd set carole lombard: the glamour collection, which, in addition to this film, includes the films we're not dressing (1934), hands across the table (1935), love before breakfast (1936), the princess comes across (1936) and true confession (1937).


== references ==


== external links ==
man of the world at imdb
synopsis at allmovie