mannan (transl.king) is a 1992 indian tamil-language masala film written and directed by p. vasu. the film stars rajinikanth, vijayashanti and khushbu. it is a remake of the 1986 kannada film anuraga aralithu, which in turn was based on the novel anuragada anthapura by h. g. radhadevi. the film was released on 15 january 1992 and ran for over 25 weeks in theatres.


== plot ==
shantidevi is announced as the number one industrialist in india. she is a rich and arrogant woman who rules her company with an iron fist. krishnan, a kind-hearted welder in bombay, comes to madras to see his mother. krishnan and shantidevi meet at the airport and their first meeting ends on a bitter note. krishnan learns that his mother is suffering from paralysis. krishnan quits his job in bombay and decides to stay in madras to take care of his ailing mother. his family doctor recommends krishnan to meet a renowned businessman for his job. krishnan goes to meet the businessman and on the way an elderly man, viswanathan, is beaten up by several men. krishnan helps him and takes him to a hospital and discovers that viswanathan is the businessman whom he was going to meet. krishnan is asked to go to the factory only to discover that factory belongs to shantidevi who happens to be viswanathan's daughter. shantidevi refuses to hire krishnan but later due to her father's compulsion she recruits krishnan.
krishnan befriends meena, shantidevi's secretary. meena is a very sweet and warm person who instantly falls in love with krishnan. in the meantime krishnan is elected as the union leader and shantidevi is not very happy about him as they have different views and ideas. they have frequent clashes due to this. meena decides to marry krishnan and reveals it to him. krishnan likes meena but advises meena to discuss it with his mother first. shantidevi on the hand decides to marry krishnan, but only to take revenge on him. she somehow convinces krishnan's mother to get her married and krishnan obliges his mother. krishnan's mother is not aware of shantidevi's plan. shantidevi expects krishnan to stay at home post marriage but her plan back fires as krishnan continues as the union leader even after marriage. shantidevi changes a policy in her company which agitates all the workers and they go on an indefinite hunger strike, which is headed by krishnan. viswanathan realizes that his company's image is at stake and takes over as the chairman. shantidevi is angered by this move saying that she has lost to krishnan. krishnan's mother comes to know about their bitter relationship and dies immediately, out of guilt. shantidevi is being kidnapped by some of her business rivals, when krishnan saves her and ultimately she realizes her mistake. the film ends with meena being appointed as the new chairman and shantidevi as a homemaker leading a happy life with krishnan.


== cast ==
rajinikanth as krishnan
vijayashanti as shanthi devi
khushbu as meena
manorama as azhagi
visu as viswanathan
goundamani as muthu
pandari bai as parvathy amma
v. k. ramasamy as meena's father
prathapachandran as raghavan
sharat saxena as sathish
uday prakash as shanti's production manager
prabhu as prabhu, krishnan's friend (cameo)
p. vasu (cameo)


== production ==
mannan is a remake of the 1986 kannada film anuraga aralithu. pandari bai reprised her role from that film. rajinikanth was paid 9 million (equivalent to 56 million or us$780,000 in 2019) for acting in the film. when goundamani was approached, he asked a figure higher than rajinikanth; he ultimately received 7.5 million (equivalent to 46 million or us$650,000 in 2019). the scene where their characters struggle to buy tickets at a cinema theatre was inspired from p. vasu's real-life experience at shanti theatre. many scenes were shot in ooty.


== themes ==
writing for popmatters, kumuthan maderya said, "at the heart of mannan is the conceit that domestic violence, physical and emotional, is a civil war of attrition that inevitably hemorrhages both parties".  in a separate article for the same website, ranjani krishnakumar viewed it differently, as "a fight between a woman in power and a man of the people, who is reluctant to take power into his own hands, but wants to steer his people towards whom he believes deserves that power, which certainly isnt her".


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by ilaiyaraaja and lyrics were written by vaali. rajinikanth made his debut in playback singing with this film, through the song "adikkuthu kuliru". the song is set in kalyani raga.


== release and reception ==
mannan was released on 15 january 1992, during the pongal holiday frame. the film ran for over 25 weeks in theatres.


== references ==


== bibliography ==
ramachandran, naman (2014) [2012]. rajinikanth: the definitive biography. penguin books. isbn 9788184757965.


== external links ==
mannan at imdb