manzil (lit.'destination') is a 1979 indian bollywood romantic drama film directed by basu chatterjee. the film was loosely inspired by the bengali film akash kusum (1965). manzil stars amitabh bachchan and moushumi chatterjee in pivotal roles. the film won critical acclaim for its story, while bachchan was praised for his performance, although, the film did only average business at the box office. the song rimjhim gire saawan is a chartbuster. the movie was reported to be the only hindi movie to have galvanometer in its core plot.


== plot ==
the story of the movie starts with a young man (amitabh bachchan) having big dreams. he falls for a rich girl (moushumi chaterjee). she falls for him as well. he pretends to be rich not to disappoint her and takes help from his friend who was a 
chartered accountant, for suit, car and flat, claiming all as his own. he wants to start a galvanometer business by buying old ones and refurbishing them to workable ones with the help of a.k. hangal. unfortunately, the big cats try to buy him out, but amitabh doesn't budge. so, they buy a. k. hangal by bribing him with money for his daughters wedding. this leads to a big failure for amitabh, whose mother lalita pawar has to give the insurance money to her son to bail him out. it still doesn't work and amitabh is taken to court by moushumi's father, a lawyer. lalita pawar encourages her son to repair the galvanometers himself and when he falls short of money, sells her gold jewellery. the prosecutor withdraws the case as the galvanometers are now repaired. his friend c.a prakash mariwalla also helps him with ten thousand rupees in disguise of an order.


== cast ==
amitabh bachchan as ajay chandra
moushumi chatterjee as aruna khosla
rakesh pandey as prakash mariwala
satyen kappu as mr. khosla
urmila bhatt as mrs. khosla
lalita pawar as mrs. chandra
shreeram lagoo as mr. kapoor
a. k. hangal as anokhelal
c. s. dubey as tolaram chhaganmal


== soundtrack ==
the music of the movie was given by r. d. burman and the lyrics are written by the legendary lyricist yogesh.


== references ==


== external links ==
manzil at imdb