mappillai (english: son-in-law/bridegroom) is a 2011 indian tamil-language action comedy film directed by suraj, starring dhanush as the son-in-law and manisha koirala as the mother-in-law with hansika motwani, in her tamil debut, playing her daughter. the film is a remake of the 1989 film of the same name, which itself was remake of telugu film attaku yamudu ammayiki mogudu .distributed by sun pictures, it was released on 8 april 2011. the film received mixed reviews and had a decent hit at the box office. it completed its 50 days of theatrical run.


== plot ==
saravanan (dhanush) is a do-gooder who is soft-spoken and admired by one and all. another person named child chinna (vivek) is the head of the namitha fan club in his area. the two of them come across gayathri (hansika motwani), the daughter of an arrogant businesswoman named rajeshwari (manisha koirala). chinna falls for gayathri, so he tries several plans to get close to her, but in vain.
gayathri falls for saravanan after he saves her from an accident. coming to know of their affair, rajeshwari decides to get them both married. the reason is that she is keen on getting a son-in-law who will always do what she wants and be under her control.
however, rajeshwari is in for a shock when she comes to know that saravanan has a past. he is a ruffian and is feared by one and all. now she plans to halt all plans, while saravanan overcomes her plans with ease. at last, he comes to know that rajeshwari had humiliated his parents (pattimandram raja and sriranjini) when they ask her to accompany them to their village festival. he makes a plan to take her whole family to his village and make them stay there in his ancestral house with the help of rajeshwari's astrologer (manobala), and further, he plans to arrange for his sister's marriage with rajeshwari's son. saravanan tricks chinna to act a wealthy businessman named james pandian, to which chinna agrees. after some time, rajeshwari knows the truth about james. she insults him and his family in front of the whole village and leaves.
later, she and gayathri are caught by some goons, so saravanan saves them and reconciles with his family.


== cast ==


== reception ==
rohit ramachandran of nowrunning.com gave it 3/5 stating that the film was good entertaining with mixed comedy and action." behindwoods.com gave 2.75 out of 5 giving the verdict "this mappillai entertains in parts" and stating "mapillai suffers from weak characterization but still how manages to keep entertain." rediff gave 2.5 out of 5 describing it a "good copy of the original", further adding that it was "just spice, humour, and plenty of silliness thrown in for good entertainment", while sify stated that "it was a romcom remake but still requires some moments". times of india gave 3 out of 5 and stated that "if you are among those for whom 'mappillai' holds a lot of nostalgia, give the latest version a miss."


=== box office ===
the film was said to have taken a good opening at the box office. at the mayajaal multiplex on the ecr, the film had 33 shows per day and had collected a net of rs 15.35 lakhs, in its opening weekend. its three-week collection in chennai was rs. 4.12 crore with 56% occupancy at 90 theatres.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack is scored by mani sharma. audio was launched on 11 march 2011 at kamarajar arangam with jayam ravi and bharath participating as guests, telecasted on sun tv on 27 march 2011. the audio was marketed by sony music india.


== references ==


== external links ==
mappillai at imdb