marked men is a 1940 american film directed by sam newfield (using the pseudonym "sherman scott") for producers releasing corporation.the film is also known as desert escape in the usa (tv title).


== plot summary ==
bill carver (warren hull) is a man who was wrongfully sentenced to prison after being framed by gangster joe mallon (paul bryar). in prison he is involuntarily involved in a jailbreak, also arranged by mallon, who is also serving in the same facility.
the attempt to break is a failure, and mallon and his men are soon caught by the police and put back behind barsall except for bill, who gets away to  the  arizona  desert  and  picks  up  a  stray  dog wolf. in the small town of tempe, he meets linda (isabel  jewell) who  offers  him  work  with  her  father dr. james prentiss harkness (john dilson). bill stays with the doctor, but then there is another jailbreak at the prison, this time a successful one.
the escapees hold up a bank and make it look like bill was involved in the robbery. he has to clear his name of being part of the bank robbery, and the only way he can do this is by catching the real perpetrators, mallon and his men. he leaves his safe haven at the doctor's place and starts tracking the gang through the desert. soon he finds mallon and his men, who are lost in the desert and need bill's help to find the border and cross into mexico. he agrees to help them, seeing his chance of clearing his name, but the journey becomes a living hell for them all. because of the lack of water and the dangers in the desert at night, only bill, his dog and mallon remain when they come close to the border. bill forces the weak and starving gangster to sign a written confession.
just as mallon finishes signing the document, dr. harkness and his daughter arrive rescue them. mallon desperately tries to kill bill, but bill is rescued by his dog. when his guilt is erased, bill can return to live in peace and quiet with the doctor and his daughter.


== cast ==
warren hull as bill carver
isabel jewell as linda harkness
john dilson as dr. james prentiss harkness
paul bryar as joe mellon
charles williams as charlie sloane
lyle clement as marshal dan tait
budd buster as mr. marvin - druggist
al st. john as gimpy - a thug
eddie fetherston as marty - a thug
ted erwin as mike - a thug
art miles as blimp - a thug
grey shadow as wolf - the dog


== references ==


== external links ==
marked men at imdb
marked men is available for free download at the internet archive