marudhu is a 2016 indian tamil-language action drama film written and directed by m. muthaiah. it features vishal and sri divya in the lead role. production began in november 2015. it was released worldwide on 20 may 2016 with mixed reviews but ended up as a profitable venture at the box office.


== plot ==
maruthu (vishal) is a labourer from rajapalayam who does not tolerate injustice. he leads a happy life with his grandmother appathaa (kulappulli leela) and his younger brother kokkarako (soori). one day, he encounters bhagyalakshmi alias bhagyam (sri divya), a bold young woman, at a temple, but their first meeting goes badly due to a misunderstanding, and he ends up at a police station. however, with appathaa's help, maruthu soon manages to win bhagyam's heart. one day, he sees some goons chasing bhagyam and her father (g. marimuthu) near the market where he is working. maruthu beats up the goons and then learns from bhagyam's father why the goons are after them.
bhagyam was the daughter of mariyamma (aadhira pandilakshmi), a brave woman who stood up to the atrocities committed by the municipal chairman rolex pandiyan (r. k. suresh) on the local people. when she decided to run against pandiyan in the upcoming municipal election, pandiyan and his men brutally hack her to death and stuff all her body parts except her head into a bag. bhagyam and her father are unable to prove in court that pandiyan committed the murder since there is no head, and the police inspector is pandiyan's henchman. they are also threatened of dire consequences by pandiyan if they continue to target him. appathaa, who witnessed mariyamma's brutal murder and is upset that she did not stop it, gets maruthu married to bhagyam the next day to repent her earlier actions, and maruthu also promises to avenge mariyamma's death.
a cat-and-mouse game soon begins between maruthu and pandiyan, with pandiyan using all means to stop bhagyam and appathaa from going to court and testifying against him, to no avail. at the court, appathaa testifies against pandiyan, and a warrant is issued to arrest him. in retribution, pandiyan kidnaps appathaa and brutally tortures her to death. when maruthu finds out how his grandmother had died at the hands of pandiyan, he single-handedly fights him and his gang and kills them all.


== cast ==


== production ==
vishal agreed terms to feature in an action film directed by muthaiah and produced by anbuchezhiyan during july 2015, with d. imman and velraj added to the team as music composer and cinematographer, respectively. lakshmi menon was considered to play the film's lead actress, but the role was eventually handed to sri divya. r. k. suresh was picked to play an antagonist, while radharavi was also added to the cast of the film, much surprisingly, after losing to vishal in a much-publicized poll during the 2015 nadigar sangam elections.the film began shooting in rajapalayam in late november 2015, after a small launch ceremony.


== release ==
the satellite rights of the film were sold to sun tv.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the film was composed by d. imman.


== reception ==
the film received positive reviews from critics. behindwoods called it "one more rural flick riding high on and violence".


== references ==


== external links ==
marudhu at imdb