mary reilly is a 1996 american gothic horror film directed by stephen frears and starring julia roberts and john malkovich. it was written by christopher hampton and adapted from the 1990 novel of the same name by valerie martin (itself inspired by robert louis stevenson's 1886 novella strange case of dr jekyll and mr hyde).
it was the re-teaming of director frears, screenwriter hampton, and actors malkovich and glenn close, who were involved in the oscar-winning dangerous liaisons (1988). 
mary reilly was theatrically released by tristar pictures on february 23, 1996. it was a box office bomb, making just $12 million against its $47 million budget.


== plot ==
mary reilly comes to work as a maid in the home of dr. henry jekyll. she and jekyll develop a rapport and he begins to call on her for assistance, to the consternation of his butler, poole. jekyll is fascinated by scars mary bears on her hand and neck, which she reluctantly allows him to examine, explaining they are from a childhood incident where her abusive father locked her in a cupboard with a live rat. the staff begin to notice the doctor throwing himself into his work at odd hours, culminating in his announcement that he has hired an assistant, edward hyde, who is to be given full run of the household.
one night, waking from a nightmare, mary sees hyde leaving the house, follows him, and witnesses him paying offwith a cheque signed by jekyllthe family of a young girl he has savagely beaten. hyde later approaches her in the doctor's library, crudely propositioning her and making taunting references to her relationship with her father. mary is equally fascinated and repulsed by him.
on an errand to deliver a letter from jekyll to mrs. faraday, a madam, mary learns that a bloody mess at the whorehouse was caused by mr. hyde. mrs. farraday arrives at jekyll's home, insists on seeing him, and  demands more money for her continued silence. while watering the garden, mary notices the lights in the laboratory go out and, investigating, discovers a small pool of blood on the theater table. she leaves, not noticing hyde disposing of mrs. farraday's severed head.
mary returns home to plan her mother's funeral. as she returns to jekyll's house, hyde grabs her in the alley and forces her into an embrace; he is being pursued by the police. eventually the police question mary about the murder of sir danvers carew, a friend of jekyll's and a member of parliament, and she denies having seen hyde that day. jekyll later warns mary that she should not have lied to the police. in any case, because the public killing of carew cannot be "easily swept under the carpet," hyde must leave london; that is why, jekyll explains, he has bribed and made hyde swear to disappear forever.
days later, mary is surprised to discover hyde in the doctor's bed. when she tries to raise the alarm, he stops her and explains that, as a cure for depression, jekyll injects himself with a serum that transforms him into hyde, who later injects the "antidote" to resume being jekyll. hyde says he now has the ability to appear without the aid of the serum, and tries to persuade her to have sex with him. mary is shocked, finding all of this hard to believe; he lets her go.
mary packs to leave, but on her way out, she decides to visit the lab. there hyde attacks her and holds a knife to her throat, but he cannot bring himself to kill her. he then injects himself with the antidote, and mary is forced to witness the horrific transformation of one man into the other. jekyll reveals that hyde has mixed a poison with the antidote, and then dies in mary's arms. in the morning, jekyll, although dead, has transformed into hyde one last time, awake and smiling, as mary walks into the fog.


== cast ==
julia roberts as mary reilly
sasha hanau as young mary reilly
john malkovich as dr. henry jekyll / mr. edward hyde
michael sheen as bradshaw
george cole as mr poole
kathy staff as mrs kent
bronagh gallagher as annie
glenn close as mrs farraday
michael gambon as mr reilly
linda bassett as mrs reilly
henry goodman as haffinger
ciarn hinds as sir danvers carew
tim barlow as the vicar
stephen boxer as the inspector
bob mason as the policeman
isabella marsh as screaming girl
richard leaf and wendy nottingham as screaming girl's parents
ellie crockett, robbi stevens, kadamba simmons, evelyn doggart, pui fan lee, mimi potworowska, samantha hones and julia hagen as farraday girls


== production ==
producers jon peters and peter guber acquired the film rights to mary reilly in 1989, and optioned them for warner bros. with roman polanski as director. when guber became ceo of sony pictures entertainment later that year, he moved mary reilly to sony's sister company, tristar pictures, where tim burton was approached to direct with denise di novi to produce in 1991. christopher hampton was hired to write the screenplay, and burton signed on as director in january 1993, after he approved hampton's rewrite.he intended to start filming in january 1994, after he completed ed wood, with winona ryder  in the leading role  but burton dropped out in may 1993 over his anger against guber for putting ed wood in turnaround. stephen frears was tristar's first choice to replace burton, and di novi was fired and replaced with ned tanen. daniel day-lewis was tristar's first choice for the role of dr. jekyll and uma thurman for the role of mary.


== release ==


=== theatrical ===
mary reilly was released in theaters on 23 february 1996 by tristar pictures in the united states.


=== home media ===
mary reilly was released on vhs on august 27, 1996, laserdisc on october 8, 1996, and dvd on september 12, 2000 by columbia tristar home entertainment. the film was released on blu-ray on october 3, 2017 by mill creek entertainment.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
reports of alleged production delays and animosity between the two leads helped fuel the poor word-of-mouth preceding the film's release. upon release, the reviews were negative, with few critics finding anything to praise about the production. as of 2021, mary reilly holds a 26% approval rating on rotten tomatoes, based on 43 reviews, with an average rating of 4.3/10. the website's critical consensus states: "mary reilly looks good and has its moments but overall, the movie borders on boredom."one critic who could muster praise was roger ebert, who awarded the film three out of four stars, feeling the story "is in some ways more faithful to the spirit of robert lewis stevenson's original story than any of the earlier films based on it, because it's true to the underlying horror. this film is not about makeup or special effects, or hyde turning into the wolf man. it's about a powerless young woman who feels sympathy for one side of a man's nature, and horror of the other."many found fault with roberts, calling her "miscast." malkovich also received his fair share of ill mention. here, too, ebert disagreed, deeming the performances "subtle and well-controlled," noting malkovich in particular as "quiet but simmering with anger."


=== box office ===
mary reilly performed poorly at the box office. it would end up earning a paltry $5.6 million domestically. as international markets released it throughout the spring and summer of 1996, it would take in only an additional $6.7 million. ultimately, the film grossed just $12.3 million worldwide. this was on a reported budget of $47 million. audiences surveyed by cinemascore gave the film a grade of c on a scale of a+ to f.


=== accolades ===
julia roberts was nominated for worst actress by the razzie awards, and stephen frears was nominated for worst director. both "lost" to demi moore and andrew bergman, respectively, for striptease. the stinkers also nominated roberts for worst actress; she "lost" to whoopi goldberg for eddie, bogus, and theodore rex. the film was also entered in the 46th berlin international film festival.


== references ==


== external links ==
mary reilly at imdb
mary reilly at box office mojo
mary reilly at rotten tomatoes