maryada ramanna is a 2010 indian telugu-language action comedy film directed by s. s. rajamouli starring sunil and saloni aswani in lead roles. this is the second film for sunil in a lead role, and is an important example of a director casting against the norm in the telugu film industry. the film opened to favourable reviews by critics. this film is inspired by buster keaton's 1923 silent comedy film our hospitality.the film received four nandi awards, including best popular feature film. it was remade in five languages, namely, maryade ramanna (2011) in kannada, faande poriya boga kaande re (2011) in bengali, son of sardaar (2012) in hindi, vallavanukku pullum aayudham (2014) in tamil and ivan maryadaraman  (2015) in malayalam.


== plot ==
a faction feud in rayalseema results in the death of ramineedu's (nagineedu) brother and he, along with his two sons mallasuri (supreeth reddy) and baireddy (prabhakar), vow for revenge. time turns 28 years and comes to hyderabad. here lives ramu (sunil), an innocent and somewhat unlucky guy whose parents are no more and is ousted out of his job. his life takes a turn with a correspondence that he has got five acres of land in his hometown in rayalaseema, andhra pradesh. he decides to sell that land and sets off to the village. in this process, he also meets aparna (saloni aswani), who is ramineedu's daughter. however, much to ramu's bad luck, he happens to be the son of the man who killed ramineedu's brother and he ends up in their home itself. he takes advantage of a tradition of their house that not even one drop of blood should fall inside the house. whether he comes alive out of their hands or not forms the rest of the story.


== cast ==


== production ==
rajamouli said "i decided that my next project would be maryada ramanna during the magadheera shooting itself because it is a 1 and half-year project that demands a lot of physical labor and mental strain. i didn't want to commit another physically exhausting film immediately after magadheera. maryada ramanna gave us time to recharge our batteries so that we could come up with another huge project." he also revealed the film's plot on the film's launch to minimize the expectations of the audience because of this film's success.


== soundtrack ==
the audio was released at a function held at shilpakala vedika, hyderabad. the launch of the audio release was a webcast live on the internet, and it got a good response from internet viewers all over the world.dasari narayana rao released the audio and handed over the first copy to k. raghavendra rao. the function was also attended by noted film fraternity like junior ntr, ravi teja, prakash raj, v. v. vinayak, dil raju, prabhas, sirivennela and other prominent cast and crew of the film. meanwhile, music director mm keeravani's birthday was also celebrated at a star-studded function.


== reception ==
the critic raghu chaitanya from cnn-ibn said "the climax is perhaps the only drawback in the entire movie as the director opts to take the clichd path of emotions and love. sunil perfectly fits the bill as the innocent guy who comes back to sell his land and make money [...] ss rajamouli emerges a winner showing that he can make good movies without huge budgets and big star cast." the times of india gave a two and a half stars explained "comedian sunil, who turned hero with andalaramudu a few years ago this time returns with another roaring comic flick and puts in a restrained performance. however, a well-designed set, great cinematography and mellifluous tunes by keeravani takes this comic caper to a different plane."sify which gave a verdict as "worth a watch" further noted "sunil would no longer look like a comedy hero. his dances are simply superb, saloni is beautiful and holds natural sex appeal. it is unfortunate that her talents remained undetected for the last three years, but for rajamouli, now. she performed with perfection all through the movie. definitely, she awaits a bright future hereafter, it seems. maryada ramanna has a judicious mix of fun, thrill and suspense."rediff gave a three stars, commented maryada ramanna is thoroughly enjoyable. rajamouli sure has a winner on his hands. sunil is able to captivate the audience and saloni looks pretty and is convincing too. nagineedu portrays the role brilliantly. there are quite a few others like brahmaji, anuj gurwara and rao ramesh who perform well."


== remakes ==
the film was remade in kannada as maryade ramanna (2011) starring komal kumar and nisha shah. its bengali remake was titled faande poriya boga kaande re starring soham chakraborty and srabanti chatterjee, in 2012,the film's hindi remake was released titled son of sardaar. it was directed by ashwni dhir and starred ajay devgn, sanjay dutt, sonakshi sinha and juhi chawla.
tamil remake was tilted vallavanukku pullum aayudham (2014) starring santhanam and ashna zaveri directed by srinath. malayalam remake was titled ivan maryadaraman (2015) where dileep and nikki galrani played the lead roles. nagineedu reprised his role in the both tamil and malayalam versions of the film.


== box office ==
the film grossed 1 crore (us$140,000) in its first weekend of release in the united states. the film collected a share of 10.58 crore (us$1.5 million) (after tax and theatre rentals) within 7 days in india. over all the film managed to gross about 30 crore (us$4.2 million) and was one among the top grossers of the year 2010.


== accolades ==
nandi awardsbest popular feature film providing wholesome entertainment  shobha yarlagadda, prasad devineni
best villain  v. nagineedu
best male playback singer  m. m. keeravani for the song "teluguammayi"
special jury award  sunil


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
maryada ramanna at imdb