masoom (transl.the innocent) is the directorial debut of shekhar kapur. it is an adaptation of the 1980 novel man, woman and child by erich segal which was also adapted into a malayalam movie olangal and an american movie man, woman and child. the film stars naseeruddin shah and shabana azmi in lead roles along with tanuja, supriya pathak and saeed jaffrey. it features jugal hansraj, aradhana and urmila matondkar as child actors. the screenplay, dialogues and lyrics are by gulzar with music by r.d. burman. the film has been remade into a telugu movie named illalu priyuralu and in turkish as bir akam st.


== plot ==
indu (shabana azmi) and dk (naseeruddin shah) have a happy marriage and two daughters  pinky and minni  and live in delhi. the tranquility of their life is interrupted when dk receives word that he has a son, the result of an affair with bhavana (supriya pathak) during his 1973 visit to nainital when his wife indu was about to give birth to their first child pinky (urmila matondkar). bhavana did not tell dk about their son as she did not want to disturb dk's matrimonial life. now that she has died, her guardian masterji sends word to dk informing him that his son, rahul (jugal hansraj), who is nine years old, needs a home. despite the objections of indu, who is devastated to learn of her husband's infidelity, dk brings the boy to stay with them in delhi. rahul is never told that dk is his father as he bonds with dk and his daughters. but indu can't bear to look at him, a tangible reminder of dk's betrayal.
dk, worried by the effect rahul is having on his family, decides to put him in a boarding school in st. joseph's college, nainital; rahul accepts with reluctance. after gaining admission at the school and returning to delhi before his permanent move to nainital, rahul figures out that dk is his father and runs away from home. after he is escorted home by a police officer, rahul confesses his awareness of the identity of his father to indu. indu is unable to bear his heartbreak and intercepts rahul before he is put on the train to nainital, thereby accepting him into the family and wholeheartedly forgiving dk, after which they drive home happily.


== cast ==
naseeruddin shah as devendra kumar malhotra (dk)
shabana azmi as indu malhotra
supriya pathak as bhavana
jugal hansraj as rahul malhotra, dk's son
urmila matondkar as pinky malhotra, dk's daughter
aradhana srivastav as minni 
tanuja as chanda, indu's friend,  a socialite
saeed jaffrey as suri, dk's family friend
paidi jairaj as master ji, bhavna's guardian
satish kaushik as tiwary ji
malvika singh as mrs. suri


== soundtrack ==
the music of the movie was composed by r. d. burman and the lyrics were penned by the noted lyricist gulzar who also wrote the screenplay for the film. burman won the filmfare award for best music for this film.


== awards ==


== references ==


== external links ==
masoom at imdb