master is a 1997 telugu action film directed by suresh krissna and produced by allu aravind. chiranjeevi played the lead role as roshini, sakshi sivanand, puneet issar and satya prakash played supporting roles. music was composed by deva while cinematography was handled by chota k. naidu. chiranjeevi for the first time in his career sang a song in the film. this is first movie in the telugu film industry to have been recorded in dts. upon the release the movie became a super hit at the box office.


== plot ==
a college principal janardan rao (vijay kumar), keen to inculcate discipline in the students, gets his one time student and protg rajkumar (chiranjeevi) posted as a telugu lecturer there.  the ideal lecturer that he is, rajkumar mingles with the students and becomes a comrade in arms and fools around with them in order to control them.  one of his students kanchana (sakshi sivanand) falls in love with him and asks him to marry her.  he refuses her politely, saying that she will rescind her proposal if she knows his past and the flashback follows.  during his student days in delhi, rajkumar falls in love with preeti (roshini), his guardian angel janardan rao's daughter. vikram (satya prakash) also loves her. when preeti turns down his overtures, vikram kills her in a rage.  rajkumar in turn kills vikram and goes to jail for five years.  after serving the jail term, he has come back as a lecturer. he parts with kanchana telling her that he cannot even think of loving any one else except preeti.  one day, when rajkumar and janardan rao were jogging they come across vikram, who was supposed to have been killed by him.  the shocked rajkumar tries to go after him to kill him. janardan rao stops him and tells him that it was vikram's brother, a mafia don dr (puneet issar), who killed preeti. when confronted by rajkumar, janardan tells him that since he had already lost five years of his life, he did not want to rake the past by telling him what he learned later for fear of losing him again. he also makes him promise that he would not go after the life of dr. helpless, rajkumar swallows his anger.  meanwhile, rajkumar's student dilip falls in love with dr's daughter. mortally afraid of dr, they both approach rajkumar for his help in getting married. he convinces janardan rao about his involvement and takes his consent. in his attempts to get them married, rajkumar confronts the ruffians sent by dr.  in the process he kills both dr and vikram and is again sentenced to five years jail. the story ends happily with rajkumar marrying kanchana who waits for him through his jail sentence.


== cast ==
chiranjeevi as rajkumar / master, janardan rao's protg
roshini as preeti
vijayakumar as janardan rao, college principal
sakshi sivanand as kanchana
puneet issar as devaraju aka dr,a mafia don
satya prakash as vikram, dr's brother
venu madhav as venu
sivaji as sivaji
tirupathi prakash as prakash
bandla ganesh


== soundtrack ==

all music is composed by deva.


== references ==


== external links ==
master at imdb