masti (english translation: fun) is a 2004 indian comedy thriller film directed by indra kumar, and starring riteish deshmukh, aftab shivdasani and vivek oberoi in the lead roles with lara dutta, amrita rao, tara sharma and genelia d'souza as female leads and ajay devgn in a supporting role. the film released in 2004, and received positive response from critics, and also managed to do well at the box office, turning out to be a moderate success at the box office. masti was also amongst the low number of bollywood adult comedy movies at the time of its release. it is the first installment of masti film series. film also had its sequels released as grand masti (2013) and great grand masti (2016).


== plot ==
masti revolves around three bachelors, meet (vivek oberoi), prem (aftab shivdasani) and amar (ritesh deshmukh). their lives are carefree until they each get married and turn into bitter, unsatisfied husbands. meet marries anchal (amrita rao) who is obsessively possessive about her husband. prem marries geeta (tara sharma) who is overly religious and thus their sex life suffers. amar marries bindiya (genelia d'souza) who is dominating and they live with her equally aggressive mother (archana puran singh). fed up, the men get together one day and make plans to reintroduce the fun and excitement back into their lives. they set their sights on other women but eventually realize they have all been seeing the same girl, monica (lara dutta). she blackmails the trio, threatening to expose the affairs to their wives unless they give her rs. 10 lakhs.
having gathered the money, the terrified men arrive at the drop off location, only to find monica dead in her car. they panic and try to hide her body, in order to avoid blame, but are interrupted by police officer sikander (ajay devgn), who is suspicious of them. the trio goes to monica's house for further investigation, and they hide in monica's veranda after they realise that sikander had followed them there. the next morning, a mysterious man finds them and reveals that he killed monica, demanding a ransom to cover the crime. the guilt-ridden men go to their respective wives to apologise, since they feel like the truth is bound to be revealed. the very next day, the killer pursues the men, resulting in a shoot out in which they unintentionally kill the mysterious man. afterwards, they are arrested and imprisoned. their wives arrive at the jail and the men emotionally reveal the truth. after some time, the women reveal that the entire situation was set up by them - monica is alive and the 'killer' is sikander himself, who is actually bindiya's cousin. the women wanted to teach their husband's a lesson and remind them to be appreciative. the men then apologize to their wives and promise to never do "masti" again.


== cast ==
ajay devgan as inspector sikander tyagi
riteish deshmukh as amar saxena
vivek oberoi as meet mehta
aftab shivdasani as prem chawla
amrita rao as anchal mehta
tara sharma as geeta chawla
genelia d'souza as bindiya saxena
lara dutta as monica singh
satish shah as dr. kapadia
archana puran singh as bindiya's mom
rakhi sawant as ms. saxena
suresh menon as prem's co-worker
murli sharma as a eunuch at band stand
divya palat
dinesh lamba
shahbaz khan as vinayak bapat


== box office ==
it did very well at the box office, earning around 26 crore (us$3.6 million) worldwide and was declared a hit by box office india.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the movie was composed by anand raj anand and the lyrics were penned by sameer. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 10,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's fifteenth highest-selling. the song 'dil de diya hai' is still popular and all time blockbuster song.


== sequel ==
a sequel named grand masti was released 9 years later on 13 september 2013. the film broke many box office records and was among the highest-grossing films, crossing the 100 crore mark worldwide. the film was given a "super hit" verdict after its theatrical run.


== references ==


== external links ==
masti at imdb