mechanic: resurrection is a 2016 american-french action thriller film directed by dennis gansel and written by philip shelby and tony mosher, with a story by shelby and brian pittman. it is the sequel to the 2011 film the mechanic, which was a remake of the 1972 film of the same name. the film stars jason statham, tommy lee jones, jessica alba and michelle yeoh.
mechanic: resurrection premiered in hollywood on august 22, 2016 and was theatrically released in the united states on august 26, 2016. it received negative reviews and grossed $125 million worldwide.


== plot ==
since faking his own death (at the end of the previous film), arthur bishop has been living quietly in rio de janeiro under the name santos. he is approached by a courier, renee tran, who knows his true identity and explains that her employer wishes bishop to kill three targets and stage their deaths as accidents. bishop escapes, eluding her and her mercenaries and fleeing to thailand. he takes shelter at the resort island beach house of his friend, mei, and learns that tran is working for riah crain. 
some time later, a bruised woman, gina thornton, approaches mei for first aid before returning to a boat anchored nearby. mei sees her being beaten by a man aboard the boat and alerts bishop. together, they rescue thornton, but in the scuffle, the man's head hits a bollard and he dies. bishop searches, unsuccessfully, for evidence of the man's identity, then sets the boat ablaze. while mei tends to thornton's injuries, bishop finds that thornton is also connected to crain, and concludes that crain anticipated bishop would become romantic with her: crain would then kidnap her to make bishop take the assassination jobs. on being charged with his theory, thornton reveals that crain had threatened the children's shelter in cambodia that she runs unless she participated. over the next few days, bishop gets to know thornton better and they fall in love. as expected, however, crain's mercenaries arrive and abduct them.
crain keeps thornton hostage to ensure bishop completes the assassinations. the first target is a warlord named krill, held in a malaysian prison. bishop gets himself imprisoned, and gains krill's trust by killing a man who attempts to kill him. bishop then kills krill himself and escapes with the help of crain's operatives. the next target is adrian cook, a sydney-based billionaire and former trafficker of underage sex workers. bishop bypasses the tight security of cook's penthouse apartment and breaks the glass bottom of his overhanging pool using a tube containing chemical that causes the glass to crack, sending him plummeting to his death.
while relaying details of the third target, crain allows bishop to speak to thornton, who repositions the camera, enabling bishop to identify crain's boat. bishop attempts a rescue, but crain is able to thwart it. crain demands bishop complete the final assassination in 24 hours. the final target is max adams, an american arms dealer in varna, bulgaria. while planning his attempt, bishop realizes that the targets are crain's only major competition in arms dealing. bishop instead approaches adams to warn him of crain's plan, and recruit his help. bishop fakes adams' death, then reports his success to crain, directing him to the submarine pen to find the body.
at the pen, bishop decimates crain's mercenaries then makes for crain's boat anchored nearby. he fights off more of crain's men and rescues thornton. he discovers the boat is rigged with explosives and puts thornton in an emergency release pod. bishop kills the remaining mercenaries, then overpowers crain and secures him to the boat with a metal chain. the bombs explode, killing crain and, apparently, bishop.
thornton is rescued and the remains of crain's boat are salvaged. thornton returns to cambodia and her teaching duties, and is surprised when bishop turns up there. adams discovers how bishop survived, he escaped in a watertight chain locker, but destroys the evidence as a token of gratitude for sparing his life and enabling him to monopolize the arms trade by taking market share from crain, krill and cook.


== cast ==
jason statham as arthur bishop
jessica alba as gina thornton
tommy lee jones as max adams
michelle yeoh as mei
sam hazeldine as riah crain
john cenatiempo as jeremy cocs
toby eddington as adrian cook
femi elufowoju jr. as marlon krill
francis tonkala tamouya as nuujib 'the slender psycho'
rhatha phongam as renee tran, crain's courier
anteo quintavalle as frank, crain's thug
aaron brumfield as adams head of security
vithaya pansringarm as prison warden
natalie burn as bbc reporter
raicho vasilev as fletcher, crain's guard (uncredited)
dylan farrell as young arthur bishop (uncredited)


== production ==
on february 4, 2015, natalie burn was added to the cast of the film.


=== filming ===
filming began on november 4, 2014 in bangkok (thailand). filming also took place in buzludzha (bulgaria), george town (malaysia), sugarloaf mountain (brazil) and sydney harbour (australia).


== release ==
on november 7, 2014, lionsgate set the film for a january 22, 2016 release. the film was later moved back to april 15, 2016, and on august 3, 2015, the release was again delayed until august 26, 2016.


=== box office ===
mechanic: resurrection grossed $21.2 million in north america and $104.5 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $125.7 million.the film was released in the united states and canada on august 26, 2016 and was projected to open to $68 million from 2,258 theaters. it grossed $2.6 million on its first day and $7.5 million in its opening weekend, finishing 5th at the box office.in china, the film made $24.3 million in opening weekend. china was the largest territory for the film, with a total gross of $49.2 million.


=== critical response ===
on review aggregation website rotten tomatoes the film holds an approval rating of 31% based on 59 reviews, with an average rating of 4.45/10. the website's critical consensus reads: "with little to recommend beyond a handful of entertaining set pieces, mechanic: resurrection suggests this franchise should have remained in its tomb." on metacritic, which assigns a weighted average score, the film has a score of 38 out of 100, based on 15 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "b+" on an a+ to f scale.variety's owen gleiberman gave the film a positive review and praised statham. he says this what the first film should have been, "a bite-sized bond film, or maybe a grittier homicidal knockoff of the mission: impossible series, with a lone-wolf renegade as the entire team."
frank scheck of the hollywood reporter praised statham but gave a mixed review "the film is certainly watchable, thanks to the elaborately staged action sequences and statham's killer charisma."


== references ==


== external links ==

official website
mechanic: resurrection at imdb
mechanic: resurrection at rotten tomatoes