melinda is a 1972 american drama film directed by hugh a. robertson and written by lonne elder iii. the film stars calvin lockhart, rosalind cash, vonetta mcgee, paul stevens, rockne tarkington and ross hagen. the film was released on august 16, 1972, by metro-goldwyn-mayer.  this film marked karate champion jim kelly's first appearance in a film.


== plot ==
frankie j. parker is a los angeles radio disc jockey. in his spare time, frankie takes karate lessons at a school run by his friend charles atkins. a woman in a rental car, newly arrived from chicago, listens to frankie's radio program. they meet at a nightclub owned by another of frankie's friends, former football player tank robertson, where she introduces herself as melinda. he invites her to a party on tank's yacht, making girlfriend terry davis jealous. frankie takes melinda to his apartment, unaware that they are being followed by a thug. they make love and, the next morning, melinda tells the womanizing, easy-going frankie that he has the makings of a more serious, substantial man. after she leaves, frankie realizes he has is developing feelings for melinda, but when he returns home, he finds the apartment ransacked and melinda murdered.
it turns out her real name is audrey miller and she is the former mistress of a chicago gangster named mitch, who is trying to recover a mysterious item melinda took with her to la. a junkie, marcia, tries to take frankie at gunpoint, but he overpowers her. frankie is attacked by two men, but manages to fight them off, helped by his karate training, although marcia ends up dead. frankie finds out that his friend tank is a business associate of mitch and owes him money. the item melinda took is in a safe-deposit box at the bank, the key to which melinda mailed to frankie before she died. unable to gain entry himself, frankie permits girlfriend terry to impersonate melinda and retrieve the item, which turns out to be a gold cigarette case.
inside the case is a tape recording that incriminates mitch in a crime. terry is taken prisoner, forcing frankie to agree to come to mitch's mansion to work out a trade. he takes the precaution of asking atkins and his karate students to come along. when they find terry is being held in a snake-filled cage, frankie, atkins and the others come to her rescue.


== cast ==
calvin lockhart as frankie j. parker
rosalind cash as terry davis
vonetta mcgee as melinda
paul stevens as mitch
rockne tarkington as tank
ross hagen as gregg van
renny roker as dennis smith
judyann elder as gloria
jim kelly as charles atkins
jan tice as marcia
lonne elder iii as lt. daniels
edmund cambridge as detective
george fisher as young man
joe hooker as rome's servant
allen pinson as rome
jack manning as bank man
gene lebell as hood
gary pagett as sgt. adams
khalil bezaleel as washington
nina roman as bank woman
jeannie bell as jean
earl maynard as karate group
dori dixon as karate group
douglas c. lawrence as karate group
evelyne cuffee as karate group
peaches jones as karate group


== see also ==
list of american films of 1972


== references ==


== external links ==
melinda at imdb