mere baap pehle aap (translation: my father, you first) is a 2008 indian hindi-language comedy-drama film directed by priyadarshan. the film stars akshaye khanna, genelia d'souza, paresh rawal, om puri, manoj joshi, archana puran singh, shobana and rajpal yadav. the story is officially adapted from the 2001 malayalam film ishtam directed by sibi malayil.


== plot ==
janaradhan wishvanbhar rane (paresh rawal) is a widower who has spent his life bringing up his two kids, chirag (manoj joshi) and gaurav (akshaye khanna). janaradhan has done everything to bring them up in the best possible manner, ever since they were toddlers.
now the duo has grown up, and gaurav has taken up the responsibility for his father. they manage the household chores and their business to the best of their abilities. he treats his father as his son. gaurav is on his guard with the vigilance of a disciplined parent. he shouts, threatens, fights, and even locks up his father occasionally so that rane's best friend madhav mathur  who is a divorc and desperate to marry  does not spoil him. madhav and janaradhan who are always in search of a bride for madhav forever land up in trouble and gaurav always has to bail them out and face embarrassment.
gaurav, busy managing his business, starts getting prank calls from a girl who turns out to be his old college classmate he used to bully, shikha kapoor (genelia d'souza). shikha is staying with her guardian anuradha (shobana) who was janardhan's first love. gaurav and shikha notice changes in the behaviour of janaradhan and anuradha when they come face to face after many years. they learn about their past relationship. now gaurav wants his father to marry his lost love. gaurav and shikha embark upon a rib-tickling journey to arrange his father's and her guardian's love marriage and, in the process, find soul mates in each other. however, the path is not so smooth; with obstacles, madhav's desperate desire for a bride comes in handy.
however, shikha's father nirmal (naseeruddin shah), seemingly not pleased with the fact that his daughter will be marrying into a family 'where the father in law is arranging his own honeymoon', threatens the termination of gaurav's relationship with shikha. in addition, chirag's wife rupali (preity pundir) and her family also show their anger at such a relationship. despite all these, after a chain of events, gaurav gets rane married to anuradha, against the wishes of many. however, at the end, nirmal reveals that in fact, if gaurav had decided not to conduct his father's remarriage and courted shikha instead, he would actually have been very disappointed. the film ends with shikha's father giving shikha's hand to gaurav.


== cast ==
akshaye khanna as gaurav j. rane
genelia d'souza as shikha kapoor
paresh rawal as janaradhan vishambhar rane
shobana as anuradha "anu" joshi a.k.a. teacher
archana puran singh as sp bhavani bhaagmaar
om puri as madhav mathur
rajpal yadav as mannu
manoj joshi as chirag rane
naseeruddin shah as nirmal kapoor, shikha's father
arjun hansda as gourav kumar
preity pundir as rupali, gaurav's sister-in-law
arzoo govitrikar as anjana 'anju'
sunil barve
mumaith khan as item number "shamma shamma"


== music ==


=== score ===
the original score of the film was composed and produced by ranjit barot.


=== songs ===
the soundtrack features songs composed by vidyasagar. guest composer tauseef akhtar composed one song, "ishq subhan allah" and its remix. sameer wrote the lyrics for all the songs.


== reception ==
after a decent opening the film performed moderately well at the box office eventually grossing 22,70,50,000 in india. according to box office india it was declared "average".


== references ==


== external links ==
mere baap pehle aap at imdb