mersal (transl.zapped) is a 2017 indian tamil-language action thriller film directed by atlee and co-written by atlee, k. v. vijayendra prasad and s. ramana girivasan, in charge of the dialogues, and produced by thenandal studio limited, thus becoming their 100th production. the film stars vijay in a triple role with s. j. surya, kajal aggarwal, samantha akkineni and nithya menen.
the story revolves around two brothers; one is a magician avenging his parents' deaths and medical crimes and the other, a reputed doctor who charges meagre amounts from his patients. the film's principal photography commenced on 1 february 2017, at chennai, and filming took place on gdask, poland and jaisalmer, rajasthan. the background score and soundtrack album were composed by a. r. rahman, while the cinematography was done by g. k. vishnu and edited by ruben.
mersal was released worldwide on 18 october 2017, coinciding with diwali and opened to positive reviews with critics praising the performance of vijay, a. r. rahman's soundtrack, the cinematography, the social message and atlee's direction, but criticised the clich plot and excessive length. it is also a recipient of various accolades. the film was a commercial success, grossing 250 crore (us$37 million) worldwide, becoming the fifth-highest grossing south indian film and vijay's highest-grossing film in his career at that time. the film's dubbed telugu version adirindhi released on 9 november 2017. the film completed 100-day theatrical run on 25 january 2018.
the film was released on 6 december 2018 in china by hgc entertainment. due to demand, the film was screened at the largest cinema theatre in europe grand rex, france. the film was screened at the hainan international film festival in hainan, china and at the bucheon international fantastic film festival in south korea.


== plot ==
an ambulance driver, a broker, a hospital worker, and a surgeon are abducted at dawn, which is traced to dr. maaran, a doctor from chennai known for providing treatment to all at just 5. maaran is arrested and interrogated by ratnavel "randy", a police officer who is assigned the case. maaran explains his motive for the abductions; the four were responsible for the death of the auto driver's daughter and subsequent suicide of his wife, selvi, due to their greed for money and negligence in providing proper healthcare. he gives randy the locations of his hostages but asserts that he had already killed them simultaneously using contraptions.
maaran reveals that he is not maaran but his doppelgnger vetri, a magician. vetri was also responsible for the death of dr. arjun zachariah, a corrupt doctor who was killed during a stage performance in paris two years earlier. dr. daniel arokiaraj, another corrupt doctor and the head of the state's medical council, had been associated with arjun who sees maaran's inexpensive healthcare as a threat to his flourishing hospital business and decides to kill maaran using his goons and one-armed henchman kasi but is saved in the nick of time by vetri, who knocks maaran unconscious and swaps places with him, providing clues to the police which led to his arrest. maaran is rescued, while vetri, manages to escape from randy. later, maaran confronts vetri, believing him to be the cause of all his problems. vadivu, maaran's compounder, and also vetri's assistant intervenes and explains to maaran why vetri is targeting doctors indulging in corrupt medical practices in general and daniel and arjun in particular.
maaran is the elder son of vetrimaaran, a village wrestler and chieftain from the 1970s and aishwarya "aishu". vetrimaaran, being referred to as "thalapathy" by his villagers due to his altruistic nature, decides to build a temple in his area and holds a large scale event with a festive mode. however, a fire breaks out, injuring many and killing two children due to lack of mobility. by the advice of aishu, vetrimaaran had established a hospital with the help of a younger daniel and arjun in his village manoor in madurai district and made chief doctors, while vetrimaaran managed the hospital. however, it soon turned out that daniel and arjun were money-minded misanthropists and performed a caesarean section on aishu when she was in labor with her second child, to extract more money from vetrimaaran, even though she could deliver the child normally. aishu lost a lot of blood during the operation, and along with an overdose of anesthesia she dies while the child was declared stillborn. when vetrimaaran found out how aishu had died, he went to confront daniel, but was attacked by empty bottles. vetrimaaran fights but in the end gets stabbed to death by kasi, but just before he died, he amputated kasi's arm and placed an unconscious maaran (who had been struck on the head with a glass bottle) safely on a chennai-bound lorry. daniel admits that he was the one who set fire to the temple and ruthlessly killed those children so he could set up the hospital just to rob and kill everyone; thus vetrimaaran swears that one day daniel will pay for his misdeeds. maaran lost his memory and was unable to recollect anything that happened before passing out due to the impact of the bottle on his head. after killing vetrimaaran, daniel and arjun embezzled money in medical service to consolidate their dictatorship over the years, while creating a massive genocide from beyond.
meanwhile, vetrimaaran's second child was not stillborn; he miraculously survived and this child was vetri and vadivu, their paternal uncle (vadivu is the younger brother of vetrimaaran) took care of him. both were adopted by a famous magician salim ghosh, and it was from him that vetri learned all his magic tricks. vadivu explains that by seeing both vetri and maaran, it reminded him of the qualities of his brother; vetri had his anger and sense of justice and maaran had his sense of selfless service. upon hearing vadivu's story, maaran reconciles with him and vetri and takes his place when the police arrive. with vetri (who is actually maaran) seemingly in custody, daniel meets him in prison and expresses his hatred and contempt for all humans and contemplates on misusing medical industry for his personal gains. meanwhile, daniel's nephew sesha tries to make a deal with maaran (who is actually vetri) to shut down his practice. however, when they both learn the truth, vetri slits sesha's hand. daniel rushes to vetri's hideout. vetri defeats all of daniels henchman and injures daniel with a glass bottle but just then kasi crashes a bus into vetri making him faint. in the truck is an unconscious maaran who got involved in an accident orchestrated by daniel. maaran wakes vetri up but as vetri is injured maaran goes and kills kasi by himself. just before daniel can strike maaran, he and vetri team up and kill daniel.
later, vetri is arrested for his role in the murders of all six people killed and is sentenced to life in prison. before leaving, he gives a press conference justifying his actions by exposing corrupt medical practices and embezzlement of money in the field; he adds that his endeavours will continue until the whole system is reformed. in prison, vetri watches a news report in which despite his efforts, another young girl in odisha had died from negligent medical treatment. on hearing this, vetri escapes using his magic tricks and continues his mission. in a mid-credits scene, maaran has conferred a statewide recognized medical counselor post, which he accepts.


== cast ==


== production ==


=== development ===
following the release of atlee's theri, in which vijay starred, the pair was signed by sri thenandal films for another project together in september 2016. safwan saleem, the chief executive officer of the production house, revealed that the film would be written by writer k. v. vijayendra prasad, who had earlier worked in films like the baahubali series and bajrangi bhaijaan. the action sequences of the film are directed by anal arasu. atlee's usual cinematographer george c. williams whom worked for raja rani and theri, was supposed to work in this film too, but failed due to clash with his other project. g. k. vishnu was signed later on making his debut in this film. vijay learnt a few magic tricks in preparation for his role as the magician. he learnt the magic tricks from three magicians: gogo requiem from the republic of macedonia, raman sharma from canada, and dani belev from bulgaria.


=== casting ===

the producers announced in january 2017 that three lead actresses  jyothika, kajal aggarwal and samantha would portray the female lead-roles in the film. the production team later revealed that due to some unavoidable reasons actress jyothika opted out of the film.  the role went to nithya menon. actors s. j. suryah and sathyaraj also joined the cast as supporting actors, with comedians vadivelu, kovai sarala, sathyan and rajendran. suryah is playing villainous role with two looks in the movie. composer a. r. rahman, editor ruben, costume designers neeraja kona and komal shahani, and debutant cinematographer g. k. vishnu, an erstwhile assistant of richard m. nathan were also a part to the technical team.


=== filming ===
a launch event for the film was held at adityaram studios in chennai on 1 february 2017, with production beginning thereafter. the team has decided to shoot a with vijay and kajal aggarwal song in jaisalmer during the summer despite the hot weather. the steam engine named 7161wp akbar was used in this movie while shooting in rajasthan. some of the filming was conducted in poland (gdask, pozna and rzeszw's airport), as well as in skopje, republic of macedonia. the shooting was held in chennai, jaisalmer, rajasthan and konaseema in andhra pradesh, while the songs were filmed overseas. it is reported that, due to indefinite strike announced by film employees federation of south india, mersal team were waiting to film few portions of the movie, which has now been completed.


== themes and influences ==
the character maaran (or 5 doctor), played by vijay in the film, was inspired from dr. balasubramanian, a doctor who hails from bodinayakkanur, theni district, and charges 2 from patients. it is also known that vijay's character jeevanantham in kaththi (2014), is inspired by a real-life social activist.critics noted that the film has similarities related to rajinikanth-starrer moondru mugam (1982), and kamal haasan's apoorva sagodharargal (1989; appu raja in hindi).


== music ==
a. r. rahman composed the soundtrack album and background score of mersal, teaming up with vijay for the third time, after his films udhaya (2004), and azhagiya tamizh magan (2007), and his first collaboration with atlee. the lyrics for the film were written by vivek, who also teams up with rahman for the first time. the audio rights of the film were acquired by sony music india, for a record price."aalaporaan thamizhan", a song from the film was released as a single on 10 august 2017, sung by kailash kher, sathya prakash, deepak and pooja vaidyanath, portrays about the popularity of tamil speaking men all over the world. the second single track "neethanae" sung by shreya ghoshal and rahman was released on 17 august 2017. the album features other remaining songs "maacho" sung by sid sriram and shweta mohan, and "mersal arasan" sung by g. v. prakash kumar, naresh iyer, sharanya srinivas, t. g. vishwaprasad.
the audio launch event was held on 20 august 2017, at jawaharlal nehru indoor stadium in chennai. the event was telecasted live on the official youtube channel of sony music south, facebook and twitter accounts of the production house. it was rumoured that the live telecast of the launch will be aired in three television channels, however it was aired live on sun tv. the film's cast and crew and other celebrities such as dhanush, sundar. c, amongst others were attended at the event, which was hosted by r. parthiban. rahman and his musical team gave a stage performance at the audio launch.


=== critical reception ===
the soundtrack album received positive reviews from critics upon its release, and the album crossed 100 million streams, within 10 days, setting a streaming record for a tamil album. amongst all the songs, "aalaporan thamizhan" was highly praised. upon its release, it topped the charts in itunes. it has also been the most searched songs of india as per the announcement made by google, and also topped the most searched topic at google trends. the music video of "aalaporan thamizhan" crossed 100 million views, as of 11 april 2019. a source from the times of india, stated that "the number is all about tamil pride, and that struck a chord with listeners. it used a lot of native instruments in the background score and vivek's lyrics spoke about the history and what it means to be a tamizhan. despite so many months, it remains a favourite among vijay fans."
behindwoods rated the album 3 out of 5, stating that "ar rahman weaves out a mass-based classy album fitting in all the elements required for vijay's screen presence!" firstpost reviewed it as "the mersal album is not a typical ar rahman one. it doesn't weave magic or get you grooving immediately, but it is exactly what would happen if you mix vijay's commercial expectations and ar rahman's trademark music. with few catchy and few forgettable tracks, mersal is a mixed bag of tunes and lots of noteworthy lyrics." studioflicks rated the album 3.5 out of 5, stating that "just four songs from ar rahman is really a surprise, but then it lets us envisage how substantial the screenplay would be that couple of songs in the first and second half each would be engrossing. maybe, the makers can release a piece of theme music later in time. as on whole, four tracks with four different genres is a real big and different treat from a.r.rahman for his fans. with vijay to take care of top-notch dance, one need not worry about the results."archana nathan from scroll.in reviewed it as "ar rahman's score for the vijay-starrer 'mersal' tries to accommodate the requirements of a mass entertainer." top10 cinema reviewed it as "mersal album has just four tracks, but ar rahman has exerted the best of his efforts appealing to the masses, especially for vijay fans. every song is based on different genres and it will surely engross everyone." bollywoodlife rated the album 4 out of 5 stars, stating "with an album like this, he has made us realise that even after 25 years, ar rahman, the musical maestro hasn't lost his sheen, magic or his ability to surprise! he has made us fall in love with this music yet again!" v lakshmi from the times of india rated 3.5 out of 5, stating that "rahman has been on an experimental mode in his last few albums, and he continues experimenting in 'mersal' as well, especially with tunes and indigenous instruments. while the lengthy numbers may not catch your attention immediately, listen to them in the loop and they are sure to find a place in your playlist."moviecrow rated the album 3 out of 5, stating that "ar rahman delivers a mass album to satiate vijay fans but the soundtrack is far-off from the composer's best."


== release ==
mersal released worldwide on 18 october 2017, coinciding with the diwali festival. before its release, the film faced issues regarding the title issues, and censorship because, the film denied approval from animal welfare board of india, granting noc, for their usage of a few animals without permission, as a result of denying censorship from the central board of film certification. on 16 october 2017, the film received a u/a certificate from cbfc, with few cuts after getting noc from awbi.
the film opened on more than 3,300 screens worldwide which is highest for a tamil film. in malaysia, the film released on 800 screens, and more than 350 screens in kerala. in karnataka, the film was released in 100 screens, and in andhra pradesh, it accounted 400 screens. the film was screened at grand rex, france, which is the largest cinema theatre in europe, due to the high demand of the film. the film's dubbed telugu version adirindhi was released on 9 november 2017.mersal was released in japan in four major cities tokyo, ebino, osaka and nakayama, which is the highest for a tamil film. the film was released in china by hgc entertainment on 6 december 2018, through 10,000 screens, which mersal becomes the first tamil film to be released in this country. the film was screened at the hainan international film festival in hainan, china in march 2019, and at the bucheon international fantastic film festival in bucheon, south korea at 29 july 2018.goldmines telefilms bought the hindi dubbing rights of the film in 2017 and dubbing was completed within mid-2018. dimension pictures, a distribution company agreed to distribute the film in hindi on diwali 2018 but it got cancelled due to unavailability of enough theaters. again, it was supposed to release in 2019, but the plan was dropped again. the hindi version remained unreleased.


== distribution ==
north star entertainment along with sn techs film distribution company have secured the distribution rights for the film in andhra pradesh and telangana; global united media has secured the distribution for the film in kerala; horizon studios acquired the karnataka rights; mks talkies has secured the distribution rights for the film in australia and new zealand, atmus entertainment has secured the distribution rights for the film in united states.


== marketing ==
the film is the first south-indian film to get a twitter emoji of its first look.


== home media ==
the television broadcast rights were sold to zee tamil for 30 crore in july 2017. the film had its global television premiere on 14 january 2018 on occasion of the thai pongal festival, the satellite rights of the dubbed telugu and malayalam versions were acquired by star maa and asianet. later, udaya tv acquired and dubbed for kannada at their own. it is available in ott-through zee5 and netflix.


== reception ==
mersal opened to positive reviews from critics. the times of india rated the film 3.5 out of 5 stars and said "with mersal, we have got this year's most engaging mass masala movie. when you have a mass hero in full form like vijay is in the film, how can things go wrong?". the indian express also gave 3.5 out of 5 stars stating: "atlee has not just exploited vijay's stardom to deliver a flamboyant crowd-pleaser (which he did in theri already) but has fleshed out an interesting script that plays up the best onscreen traits of the actor. sify rated the film 3 out of 5 stars and said "thalapathy vijay's mersal is a formulaic mass masala action film with a strong social message, whistle worthy moments, eye candy heroines and grand visuals. this film relies squarely on the charm of its leading man to pull off its over-the-top tone". hindustan times said "for vijay and his fans, atlee has delivered a celebratory film" and gave the film 3 out of 5 stars. behindwoods.com stated there are triple vijay in the movie and it had created triple positive impact and rated it 2.75 out of 5 stars.


== social impact ==
upon release, several notions expressed in the film were opposed by various organisations. the bharatiya janata party (bjp), the ruling political party of government of india, and the ruling aiadmk had objected to scenes in which the protagonist, played by vijay, criticises the recently introduced goods and services tax, and also a scene in which a character ridicules digital india, an initiative promoted by the bjp. the party demanded that those scenes be cut from the film for future viewership. these acts were seen as an attack on freedom of expression by opposing political parties and various other celebrities working in tamil cinema.several medical associations such as the tamil nadu government doctors' association, condemned the film for the alleged cynical portrayal of doctors working in government-operated hospitals. doctors working with the indian medical association, shared links of the film on pirated websites online, in the hope that it would cause monetary losses to the makers of the film.


== economics ==


=== pre-release business ===
the overall pre-release business of mersal is reported to be in the region of 156 crore (us$22 million), which includes the tamil nadu theatrical rights about  70 crore (us$9.8 million), karnataka distribution rights about 5.5 crore (us$770,000), kerala rights about 6.6 crore (us$930,000), andhra pradesh and nizam rights about 4.6 crore (us$640,000), rest of india, for 80 lakh (us$110,000), and overseas rights about 26 crore (us$3.6 million), with the worldwide theatrical rights accounting to 113.5 crore (us$16 million), whilst the satellite rights, sold to 28 crore (us$3.9 million), music rights for 3.5 crore (us$490,000), home video rights for 1.5 crore (us$210,000), and hindi dubbing rights for 11 crore (us$1.5 million).


=== box office ===
in its five-day opening weekend, the film collected 140 crore (1.4 billion indian rupees) worldwide and 170 crore its first week. in 12 days, the film grossed 200 crore worldwide, including 130 crore domestically in india. it has become the highest-grossing film of vijay's career, and the first of his films to enter the 200 crore club. at the end of its fifth week, the film had reportedly collected 120 crore in tamil nadu, 16 crore in kerala, 13 crore in karnataka and 15 crore from the rest of india, tallying 164 crore (1.6 billion rupees) domestically and 250 crore (2.5 billion rupees) worldwide.though the film was touted to have an approximate collection of 250 crore, the producer thenandal films had to file for bankruptcy  and cancel subsequent projects which were on pipeline. even the magician double in this film was not paid his full salary, because of which he moved to court, despite thenandal going insolvent, filing bankruptcy under `rule 5(1) insolvency and bankruptcy` under indian civil law. the social media propaganda loss of this film amounts to an approximate 60 crore, with references citing atlee overshooting the production budget. however, producer dhananjayan slammed everyone with his tweet, shocked to read such exaggerated statements that #mersal incurred huge loss. looks like a false motivated campaign. when the mersal producer is not talking about it, how come others are quoting such figures? on what basis? my calculation mersal is a very profitable film. truth may be out soon". mersal producer murali ramaswamy dismissed all rumours and called mersal a profitable film.


== awards and nominations ==


== references ==


== external links ==
mersal at imdb
mersal at rotten tomatoes
mersal at box office mojo