minnaram (transl.lighthouse / beacon) is a 1994 indian malayalam-language romantic comedy film written and directed by priyadarshan from a story by cheriyan kalpakavadi. the film stars mohanlal, shobana, thilakan, sankaradi, k. p. ummer, jagathy sreekumar, geetha vijayan, venu nagavally, and lalu alex. it was produced by r. mohan for goodknight films. 


== plot ==
bobby (mohanlal), orphaned at a young age, is brought up as his own son by his uncle, retd. i.g matthews (thilakan). he is loved by everyone, especially the pre-teen kids of his cousin baby (venu nagavalli). he is betrothed to chackochan's (k. p. ummer) daughter, tina (anju). however, out of the blue, his old flame from college, nina (shobhana), shows up with a toddler allegedly fathered by bobby. he denies her claims vehemently and goes to great lengths to prove her wrong. however, nina uses her wits to make matthews believe her tale, thereby pinning bobby as a liar as well. 
unable to make a swift decision, it becomes a heavy responsibility of bobby's household to keep the new info a secret from chackochan. therefore, nina is presented to others as the new home tutor for baby's children. tied up with a slew of hilarious events involving unnunni (jagathi sreekumar), who goes paranoid about bobby having an illicit affair with his wife daisy (subhashini), bobby is unable to prove his claims that the child is not a result of his relationship with nina in the past. bobby tells daisy, who is actually just his best friend since childhood, about how his relationship with nina started, grew and broke. in the meantime, nina becomes an adept tutor and slowly develops a strong bond among all the members in bobby's family, except bobby himself.
eventually, having discovered the apparent truth that nina has already been married to bobby, chackochan calls off the wedding, and publicly humiliates matthews for the dishonesty. with nothing left to lose, bobby demands nina to be his wife for real, but nina adamantly refuses. unable to handle bobby's intimidation, nina breaks down and tells him the truth.
nina divulges the truth about the child to baby, and also tells that bobby has been innocent all along. during the days of his straining marriage, baby had an affair with nina's sister, who later died during childbirth, thus leaving nina in the dire situation to deliver the child in baby's care. initially, baby refuses, for the fear of the sordid fact tearing apart his married life. but matthews overhears the conversation and slaps baby. he also feels sorry for bobby, who has taken too much toll already.
however, fate has reserved an excruciating twist in line, when nina suffers a fainting episode, right after turning down bobby's offer to marry her. thereupon it is revealed to bobby and his family by nina's brother, dr. romy (lalu alex) that she is terminally ill with polycythemia vera, just like her deceased sister. he fears that she must have skipped a dose or two by accident, which has caused her to collapse. he recalls how adamantly nina wanted to ensure that her niece would not be orphaned, and her promise that she would breathe her last only in her brother's arms. bobby's family stand together for nina's good health, backed by a team of medical experts, to fight against the odds. nina is relieved when she realizes that her niece has been gladly accepted into her rightful family. but her emotional surge puts her into a critical condition, leaving the family in mental agony.
as per the pre-planned schedule, bobby races against the clock to get the medicine radioactive phosphorus to save his beloved from the acute relapse. however, despite his best efforts and everybody's prayers, he cannot make it in time to save her. dr. romy along with bobby are left devastated. the film ends with the household now left in silence of sorrow, implying a lone bobby as well.


== cast ==


== music ==
all lyrics are written by shibu chakravarthy and gireesh puthenchery; all music is composed by s. p. venkatesh.


== remake ==
the film was later remade in tamil, titled as azhagana naatkal, directed by sundar c., starring karthik and rambha as main protagonists.


== references ==


== external links ==
minnaram at imdb