missamma (english: madam) is a 2003 telugu film sivaji, bhumika chawla and laya. the movie is directed by g. neelakanta reddy. the film was remade in kannada as namaste madam in 2014.chawla received the nandi award for best actress for her performance.


== plot ==
nanda gopal (sivaji) is an employee of jp corporation, one of the biggest business houses in india. he works as an accountant in hyderabad branch for this mumbai based firm. he is a good samaritan with high ethical values and social responsibility. he also wrote a thesis on the economy that is aimed at improving the economics of corporate companies. his goal is to show it to the md of company meghana (bhumika chawla), daughter of deceased jp. 
nanda gopal is married to a lovable and traditional girl ratna mala (laya) for the past 5 years and they lead a happy family life. their family also consists of a small kid, whom they adopted from an orphanage.
when meghana visits hyderabad branch for the first time, nanda gopal gets a chance to meet her. he tries to impress meghana. in the process, he loses his job. meghana tells him that she would put some tests and if he passes them she would make him the gm of the company. slowly nanda gopal realizes that she is playing mind games with him. now she wants to marry him. she forces him to marry her. before nanda gopal realizes it, he is in a big mess. she tortures him to such an extent that he would not even think about anything with a plain mind. 
why is meghana is behaving like a psychopath? why did she chose nanda gopal as her prey? the reason behind this game is that meghana is suffering from cardiomyopathy and she is going to leave the world soon leaving jp corporation with no heir. so she is in search of the right person to hand over the company and none reached the expectations. at the same time, when she came to hyderabad, she met with nanda gopal who had the same ideals as of her father jp. meghana thinks nanda gopal is the right person. she tortured him to test whether he is capable to lead the company or not. she marries him so that he would be the legal hier of jp corporation without any controversy. later meghana planned divorce to nanda gopal and ratna became his wife. at the end, nanda gopal and ratna mala had a baby girl and they name her missamma, which means 'madam' (nearest translation). later meghana expired and nanda gopal is the m.d. of jp corporation.


== cast ==
sivaji as nanda gopal
bhumika chawla as meghana
laya as ratna mala
sarath babu as meghana's uncle
tanikella bharani as nanda gopal's neighbor
l. b. sriram as ratnamala's father
m. s. narayana as office staff
anshu in a guest appearance


== music ==
the music director for the film is vandemataram srinivas.
the tracks in the film are 


== awards ==
nandi awards
first best feature film (gold)  b satyanarayana
best actress  bhumika chawla
best screenplay writer  g. neelakanta reddy
best female dubbing artist  savitha reddy (for bhumika)


== references ==


== external links ==
missamma at imdb