mister is a 2017 indian telugu-language romantic action film directed by srinu vaitla. it features varun tej, lavanya tripathi and  hebah patel in the lead roles.
it had opened mixed to negative reviews from critics. production began in february 2016. principal photography commenced in may 2016 in hyderabad.


== plot ==
the movie starts off with rahul vadayar (nikitin dheer) finds a new hide out for his forest smuggling business to take over control on the forest he gives a hand to gundappa naidu (tanikella bharani) who is dreaming to take over power from pichaiah naidu (nassar) who resides at a village in the midst of andhra-karnataka border, pichaiyya naidu requested his son k. j. rao (anand) to send his grandson to india and chey (varun tej) rejecting their parent's proposal of him going to india and that he hates his grandfather because his mother died in an accident because of him.
later he is sent to the airport to receive his cousin priya whom he has not met before. amidst a confusion at the airport, chey instead receives meera (hebah patel) and falls for her at the first sight, and brings her to his home. later, when he reaches home, he realizes it is meera, not priya. meera reveals that she has to be received at the airport from someone who works as a museum coordinator (melkote) at spain and that she could not contact them as she has lost her phone and that she will be here for five days. the duo starts visiting all museums, and when chey finds the museum coordinator srinu (srinivas reddy), he manages him to convince meera to stay at chey's home.
when chey's mother realizes his love towards meera, she encourages him to express his love. meera and chey meet at meera's best friend andy's headstone where she reveals that she is in love with siddharth (prince cecil), who is very much like chey, that does everything for the family. chey treasures meera as his first love, and not revealing that he is in love with meera, sends her off at the airport to india. some days later, chey receives a call from meera, revealing that siddharth has cheated her. chey then decides to leave for india when his parents suggest him to visit his grandfather and they secretly hope for meera to come back to him.
the setting changes to india, where chey visits siddharth and gets to know that meera's brother muthappa gouda (harish uthaman) threatened siddharth and his family to marry him off to another girl and that gouda's men are at his house and though he loves meera very much, he is helpless. chey successfully escapes siddharth and his family and promises him to bring meera along. later, he visits meera's place and explains her siddharth's predicament and escapes with her.
on their way to meet siddharth, the duo encounter film director lakshmi thulasi (prudhvi) and his comical associates. after some comical circumstances with lakshmi thulasi chey meets chandramukhi (lavanya tripathi), who is the daughter of sri veera narasimha rayalu (murali sharma) who belongs to king sri krishna devaraya's dynasty, who runs a private government. she escapes from her marriage arranged with rahul vadayar who is also belongs to other royal family later it reveals that he is the son of hajarappa (nagineedu) who is a trusted aid of rayalu and dhewan of their palace. who is very vicious and vengeful against the rayalu because he killed his first son on hajarappa's hands on a punishment for molesting a girl. later chandramukhi knows about rahul's character and she escapes from the palace. later she went to bangalore to her aunt's home for protection from the marriage who she does not known but her plan is in vain when they settled abroad. so there is no way left she was returning to her home. then goons started attacking her suddenly, when chey saves her and she eventually falls in love with him. it is later revealed in flashback that chandramukhi has been house arrested since she was a young girl by her father and that he deeply bases all his actions based on words of swamiji, who in turn is controlled by hajarappa.
later some comical circumstances with lakshmi tulasi and satyagrahi (shakalaka shankar), the gang meets siddharth as promised, then siddharth promises to meera that he will come back for her asap to show a safe place to his family to protection from gouda's men. after siddarth left, they were attacked by rayalu's men and are brought to the palace. chey, meera and the gang are treated very well at the palace and the two get elated. during their days at the palace, meera slowly falls for chey. later, chandramukhi asks chey to escape as they will be sacrificed very soon as a punishment for the escape of chandramukhi and bashing his henchmen. during the day of sacrifice, chandramukhi's brother bhukkaraya (bharath) notices a rudraksha shaped mole on chey's lower back and reveals that chandramukhi's life is destined with chey and they both are set to marry as swamiji has mentioned.
this makes hajarappa angry and he send men to kill chey. the three along with bhukkaraya escape to chey's grandpas home. later it is revealed by pichaiah naidu's brother (chandra mohan) revealed that in the accident which is happened by chey's father then pichiah naidu takes the blame on him in front of chey because chey doesn't want to hate his father. finally, chey unites with his grandpa. however, it is later revealed that chey does not really have a mole and this plan has been hatched by bhukkaraya and his mom (satya krishnan), to save chey and marry off chandramukhi to chey. on hearing this, meera expresses her love to chey, fearing that she might lose him to chandramukhi. later meera tells her story to chandramukhi. after hearing her story chandramukhi with a broken heart accepts her love and decides to leave chey. but, chey convinces meera that siddharth loves her as much as him, and he confesses that he really loves chandramukhi. then a fight arises between hajarappa and pichaiah naidu, in the process chandramukhi kills hajarappa by the way all the facts were known to rayalu. meanwhile, in the challenge day (rahul vadayar challenges pichiah naidu in a dual for the support of gundappa naidu to take over power from him) chey enters on behalf of pichiah naidu reveals that his full name is also pichaiah naidu. in the dual with rahul, chey bashes him to death.
finally, meera marries siddharth with the consent of muthappa gouda and chey marries chandramukhi, with their all families united.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by mickey j. meyer and released by aditya music.


== release ==
mister was released on 14 april 2017.


== references ==


== external links ==
mister on facebook
mister at imdb