mizhi randilum (english: in both eyes) is a 2003 malayalam film written and directed by ranjith, starring dileep, kavya madhavan,  indrajith, jagathy sreekumar, sukumari, and revathi. this movie was actor narendra prasad's last film.


== plot ==
bhadra (kavya madhavan) is a nurse who is living with her widowed mother, grandmother and twin sister bhama, a medical student. her older brother achuthankutty (jagathy sreekumar) is a politician. bhadra falls in love with arun (indrajith), a doctor who works with her. arun has a muslim father and a hindu mother who agrees to have bhadra as their daughter in law, but achuthankutty hates him because his father is a muslim, causing arun and bhadra to break up.
meanwhile, achuthankutty has troubles with a ruthless businessman and moneylender named krishnakumar(dileep) who forces achuthankutty to sell the family house to him. bhadra and bhama are left to be taken care of by their sister-in-law. she meets krishakumar's sister sridevi who was paralyzed after the death of their parents. krishnakumar falls in love with bhadra owing to her simplicity and proceeds to marry her. bhadra's life takes a tragic turn when arun commits suicide, and bhadra goes into mental shock. krishnakumar decides to take care of the traumatized bhadra and later marry her.
the story has a positive ending were we see bhadra telling krishnakumar that she is pregnant.


== cast ==
kavya madhavan ...  bhadra / bhama
indrajith ...  dr. arun
dileep ...  krishnakumar
jagathy sreekumar ...  thechikkattu achuthankutti
sukumari ...  bhadra's mother
revathi ...  sridevi
master ajai... bhadra's son
vijayakumari ...  as yasodara
narendra prasad ...  bappuji
janardhanan ...  thampi
kunchan ...  vasu
shobha mohan ...  devi
kalpana ...  sarada
zeenath ...  vathsala koshy
augustine ...  bichu
sadiq
abu salim as srada's husband
sai kumar
meena gnesh
santha devi as grandmother
v. k. sreeraman
siddique as menon


== soundtrack ==
the film's soundtrack contains 6 songs, all composed by raveendran, with lyrics by sarath vayalar.  
all the songs are evergreen hits.


== external links ==
mizhi randilum at imdb