for the alternative rock band from dublin, ireland see mrnorth.mr. north is a 1988 american comedy-drama film starring anthony edwards, based on the novel theophilus north (1973) by thornton wilder.
directed by danny huston, the film became a family project; produced by john huston, it also stars anjelica huston, danny huston's future wife virginia madsen, and allegra huston.


== plot ==
in 1920s newport, rhode island, theophilus north (anthony edwards) is an engaging, multi-talented, middle-class yale university graduate who spends the summer catering to the wealthy families of the city. he becomes the confidant of james mchenry bosworth (robert mitchum), and a tutor and tennis coach to the families' children. he also befriends many from the city's servant class including henry simmons (harry dean stanton), amelia cranston (lauren bacall), and sally boffin (virginia madsen).
complications arise when some residents begin to ascribe healing powers to the static electricity shocks that mr. north happens to generate frequently. despite never claiming any healing or medical abilities, he is accused of quackery, and with the help of those he has befriended, must defend himself.
in the end, mr. north accepts a position of leadership at an educational and philosophical academy founded by mr. bosworth, and begins a romance with bosworth's granddaughter persis.


== cast ==
anthony edwards as t. theophilus north
robert mitchum as james mchenry bosworth
lauren bacall as amelia cranston
harry dean stanton as henry simmons
anjelica huston as persis bosworth-tennyson
mary stuart masterson as elspeth skeel
virginia madsen as sally boffin
tammy grimes as sarah baily-lewis
david warner as dr. angus mcpherson
hunter carson as galloper skeel
christopher durang as ymca clerk
mark metcalf as george skeel
katharine houghton as mrs. skeel
thomas h. needham as judge nicholas catwalader
richard woods as willis
harriet rogers as tante liselotte
layla summers as nadia denby
lucas hall as joseph denby
thomas-laurence hand as luther denby
linda peterson as mrs. denby
cleveland amory as mr. danforth
christopher lawford as michael patrick ennis iii
marietta tree as amanda venable


== production ==
director danny huston brought the original script by james costigan to his father for feedback, and john huston rewrote it with his prizzi's honor co-author janet roach. eugene lee was the production designer.
originally, john huston was to play james mchenry bosworth, but just after filming began, the illness that eventually killed him forced his withdrawal. he was quickly replaced by family friend robert mitchum.


== home media ==
when the film was released on vhs video in 1995, it was in its original format.  later, when a dvd version was released, it had undergone an alteration in which the opening credits, visual sequence, and musical score were all edited and juggled around. portions of the main characters ride along the rhode island coast and countryside where he lives were deleted when the screen fades to a black overlay with newly redone credits for a period of one minute and fifty seconds.  the opening score was still used, but stretched to accommodate the altered length.  the streaming version of the film seems to be a direct copy of the dvd remaster and not the original theatrical version.


== references ==


== external links ==
mr. north at imdb
mr. north at allmovie
mr. north at box office mojo
mr. north at rotten tomatoes