mr. nice guy (, lshk jat1 go3 hou2 jan4) is a 1997 hong kong-australian action film directed by sammo hung and starring jackie chan and richard norton. hung cameos as an unfortunate cyclist. the film was released in hong kong on 31 january 1997.
mr. nice guy features a collaboration between chan and norton, reuniting them for the first time since 1993's city hunter. set in melbourne, australia, it is chan's first film to be scripted and shot in english.


== plot ==
television journalist diana (gabrielle fitzpatrick) records footage of a cocaine deal gone wrong between the italian mob and a street gang called the demons. during the deal, mob boss giancarlo (richard norton) kills the demons' leader grank (peter lindsay) and a gun fight (with grenades) ensues. giancarlo spots diana and her partner richard and orders his gang to chase them. richard is captured while diana flees from the mobsters, bumping into tv chef jackie (jackie chan), who helps her escape. during the chase, she accidentally switches the videotape of the drug trade with one of jackie's cooking videos. the children of romeo baggio (vince poletto), jackie's adoptive brother, end up in possession of the tape. his children watch the video, unaware of what it is and that their father is investigating the mob.
the mob, knowing the tape is still out there, force richard to give them diana's address. they ambush diana at her house, but after realizing she has the wrong tape, they force her to come with them after she reveals that jackie has the tape. while walking outside with the mobsters, diana instigates a distraction and flees. the mob believes jackie has the tape and follows him around, while some demons follow them, hoping for a chance to kill some of the mobsters in retaliation for killing grank. jackie is forced to fend them off and run when they attack him at a benefit event he is hosting at the mall. puzzled at the mobsters' actions, one of the demons asks a mobster why they're chasing jackie.
jackie learns why the mob is chasing him after diana sneaks into his house searching for the tape. she is attacked by jackie's friend lakeisha, who thinks her an intruder, but jackie intervenes. diana begs for the tape, but jackie is (correctly) convinced that he doesn't have it. before diana can leave jackie's apartment building, giancarlo's henchmen show up (unaware that demon members have been following them). jackie and the women escape from the roof just as the demons throw grenades in jackie's apartment, killing the mobsters and blowing up jackie's apartment. the demons realize afterwards that was jackie's apartment, and how serious giancarlo is about retrieving the videotape. they decide to exploit the situation in order to extort money from giancarlo. they call giancarlo to set up a meeting to trade the tape (and the mob's stolen cocaine) for a large sum of money.
everyone decides to stay at lakeisha's home for safety, but the demons track them. they kidnap jackie's girlfriend miki (miki lee) and give jackie a cell phone, demanding that he give them the videotape in 12 hours. jackie turns to romeo for the police's help. the next day, jackie goes to meet the demons to trade in a (decoy) videotape, but no demon meets jackie in person. instead, they frequently call him on his cell phone and make him go to various locations in the city. the police trace each call, but discover the demons are trying to thwart their presence, so they follow jackie instead. however, the gang discovers this and they escape with miki. jackie, angry at the cops' mishandling, refuses to work with them anymore. however, he is kidnapped by the demons moments later. jackie fights off the gang and causes their van to crash. before the police show up, jackie forces one of the demons to tell him where miki is: at a construction site.
jackie insists to diana and lakeisha not to follow him to the construction site, but they go there anyways. while jackie looks for miki, giancarlo and his men show up. a fight ensues between jackie and the mobsters, which ends in jackie getting captured. lakeisha and miki are also taken, while diana is injured but escapes. giancarlo murders the other demons on site except for tara, who also escapes but with serious injuries. meanwhile, romeo discovers his son watching diana's tape, the proof he needs to arrest the mob, and visits the hospital where diana and tara are being treated. the women inform him about what happened to jackie and the others.
at giancarlo's home, giancarlo demands the tape from jackie one last time. jackie decides to call romeo, but he's not home. afterwards jackie is forced into an unfair fight with giancarlo. after taking a beating, giancarlo orders his men to kill jackie and the women at "the guesthouse", which is code for a mining site used by giancarlo where he buries people alive. however, they escape and destroy giancarlo's home by driving through it in a 120-ton mining vehicle, which also causes incriminating evidence (cocaine) to be spread outside in plain view of the cops. the authorities arrive with romeo, but they decide to state that they did not witness anything and that it was just another gang battle, so that jackie can go free while the mobsters are arrested for possession of cocaine.


== cast ==
jackie chan - jackie
richard norton - giancarlo
miki lee - miki
karen mclymont - lakeisha
gabrielle fitzpatrick - diana
vince poletto - romeo
barry otto - baggio
sammo hung - cyclist
emil chau - ice cream vendor
joyce godenzi - cook show audience (as mina godenzi)
peter houghton - richard
peter lindsay - grank, "demon" gang leader
david no - victor
rachel blakely - sandy, "demon" gang member
aaron notarfrancesco - sonny
jake notarfrancesco - nancy
greg jamieson - priest
matthew dyktynski - cooking show floor manager
salik silverstein - cooking show director
lynne murphy - babysitter
carla bonner - cameo
karl ajami - giancarlo's man
brad allan - giancarlo's man (as bradley allan)
paul andreovski - giancarlo's man
habby heske - giancarlo's man
cameron douglas - giancarlo's man
grant page - giancarlo's man
paul douglas - giancarlo's man
david baldwin - giancarlo's man
brent houghton - giancarlo's man
ian mall - giancarlo's man
dennis christensen - giancarlo's man
michael john noonan - giancarlo's man
darko tuskan - giancarlo's man
john raaen - giancarlo's man
gary shambrooke - giancarlo's man
andy cheng - giancarlo's man at construction site (extra) (uncredited)
mars (extra) (uncredited)
frederick miragliotta - captain morrison
nai su rak - female in chinatown (extra) (uncredited)
phillip hobden - male police officer (extra) (uncredited)
graham pearson  - male police officer (extra) (uncredited)
doug selby - male police officer (extra) (uncredited)


=== jackie chan stunt team ===
brad allan
chan man-ching
andy cheng
johnny cheung
rocky lai
nicky li
mars


== production ==
the film was originally going to be the fifth film in jackie chan's police story film series, with its setting in sydney, australia, but in a month's time it was revised to become a stand-alone action film set in melbourne. it is chan's first film to be scripted and shot in english.according to his book i am jackie chan: my life in action, chan hurt his neck when he messed up on a flip during a fight scene. he also broke his nose during filming.


== box office ==
mr. nice guy opened on chinese new year, 1997, against director hung's own once upon a time in china and america. both were box office successes, but mr. nice guy was the bigger of the two, making hk $45,420,457 in its hong kong run. in taipei, taiwan, mr. nice guy grossed nt $43.1 million.in north america, mr. nice guy was released by new line cinema on 20 march 1998 in 1,463 theatres. in its opening weekend, it grossed us $5,250,704 ($3,588 per screen) on its way to a total of us $12,716,953.


== accolades ==
1997 golden horse film festival
winner: best action direction (wing cho)
1998 hong kong film awards
nomination: best action choreography (wing cho)


== new line cinema edit and dvd releases ==
for us $6 million, new line cinema acquired from golden harvest the international distribution rights to the film outside of asia. the film received a partial dub, a new score, and more than 13 minutes of cuts were made. most of the cuts were bits of violence (violence against women in particular), and cuts for pacing. many scenes were also rearranged. the most noticeable scene rearrangement are the opening scenes of giancarlo killing tina and jackie's cooking show. the original version opens with giancarlo killing tina, then jackie's cooking show, but new line cinema's edit opens the other way around, giving the movie a more "lighter" tone from the start.there are also differences between the hong kong and the japanese versions of the film. the only scene cut from the hong kong version is the entirety of a dinner scene featuring jackie, romeo, baggio, lakiesha, sonny, and nancy (romeo's children). the japanese version contains this scene in its entirety, whereas the new line cinema edit contains most of this scene, but with a few cuts.various dvd versions of this film have been made. the warner brothers japanese r2 version is the only version available with the original english dialog and the fully uncut version (the japanese edit). however, the picture is non-anamorphic and has no english subtitles. the taiwan funny version has the new line cinema and taiwanese versions, but the latter is dubbed in mandarin. the hk version is similar to the taiwanese, but dubbed in cantonese. both dubbed asian versions refer to the demons as the "wolves," although in the end credits the actors are credited as "demons."in september 2019, warner archive collection announced that it would release the film on blu-ray, including the original uncut version newly remastered in hd sourced from a 4k scan of the original camera negative, in addition to the original new line cut. the blu-ray was released on october 29, 2019.


== references ==


== external links ==
mr. nice guy at the hong kong movie database
mr. nice guy at imdb
mr. nice guy at allmovie
mr. nice guy at rotten tomatoes