mubarakan (transl.congratulations) is a 2017 indian hindi-language romantic comedy film directed by anees bazmee. it is produced by sony pictures networks productions, murad khetani and ashwin varde.anil kapoor, arjun kapoor, ileana d'cruz and athiya shetty played the lead roles in the film. it is a story about twin brothers. the film was released worldwide on 28 july 2017 in 2350 screens in india and 475 screens overseas.after aurangzeb in this movie arjun kapoor appeared second time in dual role but this film was"flop" at "box office".


== plot ==
the story starts with a couple traveling with their twin boys in a car. the dad is exhausted and dozes off at the wheel causing an accident. the couple dies but the twins survive. the twins are sent to their uncle, kartar singh (anil kapoor).  as he is a confirmed bachelor, he decides to give one son to his elder sister arshveer "jeeto" kaur (ratna pathak) based in london and the other to his brother baldev singh bajwa (pavan malhotra) who is settled in punjab whilst he himself enjoys his single, lonely life in london.
years pass and both twins grow up. karan singh bajwa (arjun kapoor) lives with jeeto, who he recognizes as his mother, in london and charan singh bajwa (arjun kapoor) lives with baldev, who he recognizes as his father, in punjab. karan has a girlfriend, supreet "sweety" gill (ileana d'cruz) from the past 2 years. karan's father, paramjeet (lalit parimoo), wants him to marry a girl named binkle sandhu (athiya shetty), whose rich father akalpreet (rahul dev) helped paramjeet start his business. because he wants to marry sweety, karan manages to convince baldev to make charan marry binkle.
meanwhile, in punjab, charan also has a girlfriend, nafisa qureshi (neha sharma) who is a muslim and studying law. but since baldev is biased against muslims, charan hasn't told him about her. baldev takes charan to london where kartar welcomes them. in london, charan tells kartar that he doesn't want to marry binkle and he is in love with nafisa. his uncle suggests that he pretend to be a drug addict in front of the sandhu family so that they will turn down the marriage proposal themselves. the next day, charan does as planned but when he sees binkle, he falls in love at first sight. binkle takes charan on a tour of the house while kartar hints at the silly habits of charan's drug addiction to manpreet (karan kundra), binkle's brother.
charan tries to alert kartar to his sudden change of heart, but, in a comic twist, falls out of the window trying to capture the phone signal. due to this incident, manpreet turns suspicious and assumes charan to be a drug addict. this upsets baldev and he gets mad at the sandhu family. jeeto and paramjeet, instead of defending baldev, persuade him to apologize to akalpreet for his misbehavior but baldev refuses to do so. they return home and blame baldev for their disrespect in front of the wealthy sandhu family and humiliate him. this angers baldev and he decides to return to punjab. he challenges jeeto that he will marry charan exactly on 25 december with a girl much better than binkle. they have a huge argument and sever ties with each other. meanwhile, charan asks karan to bring nafisa to the airport so that he could talk about his feelings for her with baldev. when they land in punjab, karan does what charan asked and confronts them with nafisa, but charan is terrified and doesn't dare to speak up. baldev misunderstands that nafisa is karan's girlfriend. this creates a complicated situation for karan. baldev overhears sweety's father pleading for her daughter's marriage soon in a gurudwara. so, baldev takes charan's purposal for sweety who misunderstands her bond getting tied with karan but later realizes it's tied with charan. she gets upset at karan. while back at london, jeeto takes a proposal for karan to binkle without karan knowing. they fix their marriage on 25 december too.
kartar is split on whether to go to jeeto or baldev's marriage events since they are at the same date. to solve his problem, he suggests that baldev have a destination marriage in london. baldev agrees and everyone flies to london. everyone goes to a mall for shopping. charan takes advantage of this and reveals karan and sweety's relationship. on hearing this binkle is heartbroken. charan feels sorry for her and falls for her more because of her innocence towards him. charan refuses to fight for his rights. karan then invites nafisa to london for charan's engagement to sweety increasing charan's problems. karan, charan, sweety and nafisa decide to elope. but their plan fails when in the next morning manpreet falls for nafisa and akalpreet insists her to live at his residence. nafisa falls for manpreet and starts ignoring charan, who wants to reveal his feelings for binkle but at the moment, nafisa appears and confess her love for manpreet and leaves. charan and karan's marriages are planned at the same gurudwara on the same date.
before binkle's engagement, charan confess all the mishaps and misunderstandings happened and explains that he is not a drug addict too. he also reveals his feelings to her at last. kartar dreams of his brother avtar (sanjay kapoor), the twins' father, realizing him that he left his children to him and he is ruining their life. after binkle's engagement, karan, sweety, charan, binkle, manpreet, nafisa and kartar gather at a place where kartar declines to help them and said they would have to marry the ones chosen by their parents instead of eloping unless they did something. so, 25 december arrives when karan and charan exchange their sherwanis, disguising each other. at the gurudwara, sweety reveals her love for karan in front of everyone. this shocks everyone including charan and karan because of their exchanged identities. kartar then explains to jeeto and baldev they are being silly and should stop arguing. they patch up. not to cause more trouble and confusion the twins take kartar in for a confidential meeting revealing their exchanged identities where kartar orders them to wear their original identities and never ever discuss this mishap with their wives. so, their families no more oppose their choices and karan weds sweety while charan weds binkle.


== cast ==
anil kapoor as kartar singh bajwa, avtar, jeeto and baldev's brother, karan and charan's uncle
arjun kapoor in dual roles as karanveer "karan" singh bajwa & charanveer "charan" singh bajwa, twin brothers who live with their aunt and uncle respectively, considering them as their parents.
ileana d'cruz as supreet "sweety" gill, karan's girlfriend later wife charan's ex-fiance
athiya shetty as binkle sandhu, charan's wife, karan's ex-fiance
neha sharma as advocate nafisa qureshi, charan's ex-girlfriend and manpreet's wife
rahul dev as akalpreet sandhu, manpreet and binkle's father
karan kundra as manpreet sandhu, binkle's brother and nafisa's husband
gurpal singh as sweety's father
ratna pathak as arshveer "jeeto" kaur bajwa, baldev, kartar and avtar's sister, karan and charan's aunt and karan's adoptive mother
pavan malhotra as baldev singh bajwa, jeeto, kartar and avtar's brother, karan and charan's uncle and charan's adoptive father
sanjay kapoor as avtar singh bajwa, jeeto, baldev and kartar's brother and karan and charan's biological father
lalit parimoo as paramjeet singh gill, jeeto's husband
alexander dolbenko as jolly, kartar's british assistant
krishan tandon as baba ji of gurudwara.


== production ==
the guru nanak darbar gurdwara in gravesend, kent features as the temple the families worship.


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film has been composed by amaal mallik, gourov roshin, rishi rich and while the lyrics have been penned by kumaar. its first song "mubarakan (title track)" was released on 22 june 2017. the second single titled as "hawa hawa" which is sung by mika singh and prakriti kakar was released on 29 june 2017. the soundtrack was unveiled on 6 july 2017 by t-series which consists 6 songs.

all lyrics are written by kumaar.


== critical reception ==
rohit vats of hindustan times rated it 3/5 and felt that the lead actor, arjun kapoor, was overshadowed by anil kapoor: "its just that anil kapoor is a pro at it and steals all the limelight from him (arjun).....youll be occasionally laughing, but probably wont be leaving the theatre with a big smile on your face.meena lyer of times of india rated the film 3/5 and concluded: "anil is the scene-stealer with his half brit-half punjabi act lifting the film throughout. arjuns double-act allows for some smiles and the girls, ileana, athiya and neha are easy on the eye, though theyre just decorative set-pieces."manju ramanan of masala! gave the film 3.5/5 saying, "loud characters, bright sets, songs and dances and slapstick humour dominate this anees bazmee film. but the instances do make you smile.ahana bhattacharya of koimoi gave the film 3/5 saying, "the story is funny and the film has some really hilarious dialogues. however, sardar jokes are a bit clichd and bollywood needs to get over it. i loved the way the film builds up the confusion but it tends to drag towards the climax. there are moments when you will feel it is patriarchal, racist and regressive. also, the climax is a bit predictable.


== references ==


== external links ==
mubarakan at imdb
mubarakan at bollywood hungama