mujhe kucch kehna hai (transl.i want to say something) is a 2001 indian hindi romance film directed by satish kaushik and produced by vashu bhagnani. the film was the debut performance of tusshar kapoor, who played alongside kareena kapoor. the film was an official remake of the 1998 telugu film tholi prema. it was released on 25 may 2001 and was a surprise hit at the box office.


== plot ==
the story revolves around a sensitive young adult karan (tusshar kapoor), who frequently skips college. despite his poor academic performance, he displays many other talents. he is clever, an excellent musician, and plays in a band. his father constantly expresses his disappointment in him which often leads to karan having outbursts of frustration and anger.  one day in a deserted street, he lays eyes on pooja (kareena kapoor) for the first time and falls in love with her. following this brief acquaintance, he looks all over for her but fails to find her. he slowly begins to lose hope in his quest, stops playing music and decides to move to another city with his uncle. while on his way there, his car breaks down, and he is forced to hitch a ride. to his amazement, he finds pooja in the driver's seat. as they introduce themselves, an accident occurs when a truck collides with their car, which subsequently falls into a valley. karan and pooja find themselves hanging from a cliff, and even though karan manages to haul pooja back up the steep cliff, he loses his grip and falls into the ravine.
when pooja regains consciousness, she assumes responsibility for karan's death and offers to help in the search for his body. meanwhile, karan has survived the fall but is seriously injured and unconscious. he is found by a man who takes him to the hospital and soon after, karan is reunited with his family. as he recovers, he reflects on how he should have confessed his love to pooja in the few moments they were together. he also begins to focus on his education instead of his music. in time, pooja arrives at his doorstep to apologize and offers her friendship. they become good friends and then pooja tells karan that she must leave for the united states for further studies. devastated, he finally confesses his love for her. pooja feels the same way and cannot deny her feelings for karan, and promises that she will return to him once she completes her education. karan agrees to patiently wait for her.


== cast ==
tusshar kapoor as karan
kareena kapoor as pooja saxena
dalip tahil as krishna
amrish puri as balram singh
rinke khanna as priya
vrajesh hirjee as chinku
alok nath as rana virendra pratap singh
dinesh hingoo
himani shivpuri as sushma
yashpal sharma as batsman/gang leader
hemant pandey as dabbu
darshan kumar


== soundtrack ==
anu malik composed the soundtrack for the movie, while sameer penned the lyrics. the bonus track by kk was added 35 days after the original album was produced, when they had completed the shooting for pyaar re. it was a joint venture after seeing the emotional outburst within tusshar, which highlighted the title track. the album was a big chartbuster album with songs like mujhe kuch kehna hai,  maine koi jaadu & others becoming rages. anu malik was nominated for many awards for the album and the soundtrack was in top ten albums of 2001. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 32,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's second highest-selling.


=== track listing ===
all lyrics are written by sameer.


== awards ==
filmfare awards 2002best music director, anu malik, nominated
best male debut, tusshar kapoor, wonstar screen awards 2002best director, anu malik, nominated
best male playback, sonu nigam, nominated
best story, rumi jaffery
most promising newcomer  male, tusshar kapoor, nominatedzee cine awards 2002best male debut, tusshar, won
best actor in a comic role, vrajesh hirjee, nominated
best music director, anu malik, nominated


== sequel ==
a sequel to the film was announced, however, it will only feature tusshar kapoor, as kareena kapoor declined the role. many sources also claim that the 2010 film milenge milenge (which also starred kareena kapoor), was an official sequel to mujhe kucch kehna hai. this was not confirmed by the director, satish kaushik.


== references ==


== external links ==
mujhe kucch kehna hai at imdb 
mujhe kucch kehna hai at bollywood hungama
mujhe kucch kehna hai at indiafm.com