mujhse fraaandship karoge (transl.will you be friends with me?) is a 2011 indian hindi romantic comedy film directed by nupur asthana, starring debutant actors in the lead roles. the film is the second production of y-films, a subsidiary of yash raj films. it released on 14 october 2011. it also marked the debut of indian folk rocker raghu dixit in bollywood. the film drew inspiration from 2001 telugu movie anandam and the popular social networking site facebook.


== plot ==

university students vishal bhatt (saqib saleem) and preity sen (saba azad) hate each other. vishal's good looking best friend rahul sareen (nishant dahiya) is a singer and is pretty popular amongst the girls in their college. vishal writes the lyrics for rahul's songs but never takes any credit for it. preity is the president of the photography club. preity's good looking friend malvika kelkar (tara dsouza) is a fashion designing student. malvika's parents live abroad leading to her stay with preity and her mom. rahul ignores a lot of friend requests from girls on social networking sites i.e. facebook and malvika; being the female version of him, ignores a lot of requests from guys. vishal likes malvika and preity likes rahul. vishal sends a friend request to malvika through his own in rahul's account. malvika, as usual, ignores both the friend requests (thinking rahul is desperate- he sent her a request just after 1 meet). preity, after malvika leaves, uses her account and accepts the friend request from rahul. vishal starts talking to malvika pretending to be rahul. but, he is actually talking to preity, who is pretending to be malvika and thinking that she's talking to rahul. vishal and preity are busted by their friends and they request their friends rahul and malvika to go on a date. rahul and malvika starts liking each other after seeing that they have a lot in common. they go on a double date, malvika with vishal and preity with rahul. the college is celebrating its silver jubilee. the theme for the festival is a photographic documentary (idea of preity) of the romantic history of the college (idea of vishal). vishal and preity have to work together, sorting their differences. they have a lot in common; they are both immature and bicker a lot. slowly, after spending time together they both sort out there previous differences and gradually become good friends. at rahul's birthday party, vishal finds rahul kissing malvika. on seeing this, an enraged vishal tells malvika that it was he who had chatted on facebook with her and not rahul. it is soon discovered that preity too, has overheard the conversation. this angers her, resulting in her telling him that it was not malvika but her who chatted with him. she admits that she had fallen in love with him but vishal is still angry at what he considers his friend rahul's betrayal. at the college's silver jubilee festival, vishal finally realizes his mistake and tells preity that he loves her during the event on stage ending up in them kissing, celebrating the new generation of romance.


== cast ==
saqib saleem as vishal bhatt
saba azad as preity sen
nishant dahiya as rahul sareen
tara dsouza as malvika kelkar
suparna marwah
prabal panjabi as hacky
manasi rachh as neha
harsh nagar as amit khanna
chitrak bandyopadhyay as satyavrat "machoman" bandyopadhyay
zuha sharma as rashmi patel


== production ==


=== development ===
on 1 april 2011 the film was unveiled publicly as the second production venture of y-films and the cast of the film met the press along with the actors from y-films' other venture, luv ka the end.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
the film was positively received by most critics. leading bollywood portal movie talkies quoted "y-films' latest outing is a must watch. and with characters like vishal, preity and hacky, who stay with you long after you've left the theatre hall, this is one 'fraaandship' request everyone should accept instantly!" and rated mujhse fraaandship karoge with 3.5 stars. popular bollywood portal glamsham gave the movie 3.5 stars. fullhyd.com rated it 6 out of 10, stating, "you could watch it once if you're about 18, but those who're older will have to skip it."


== soundtrack ==
most of the film's music is composed by raghu dixit. taran adarsh of bollywood hungama gave the soundtrack three stars out of five and praised it for the variety dixit brought in the five songs he composed. he also said the album has the kind of songs that should not be dependent upon the theatrical run of the movie and is expected to find listeners even after the movie releases.


== references ==


== external links ==
mujhse fraaandship karoge at imdb 
mujhse fraaandship karoge at bollywood hungama