mumbai police  is a 2013 indian malayalam-language psychological thriller film written by bobbysanjay and directed by rosshan andrrews. it stars prithviraj sukumaran, jayasurya, and rahman in the lead roles, along with kunjan, aparna nair, deepa vijayan, and debutant hima davis in supporting roles. shweta menon and riyaz khan appear in guest roles. the film is produced by nisad haneefa and co-produced by nivas haneef and niyas haneefa. the background score was composed by gopi sundar and the cinematography was handled by g. diwakaran. the film was edited by mahesh narayanan.
mumbai police completed filming in 56 days versus the planned schedule was for 60 days and with a production cost of 5.75 crores versus the budget of 6 crores. even before release, it had recovered 4.30 crores through various rights. the khaleej times identified mumbai police as one of the "remarkable box-office success[es]" of 2013.


== plot ==
acp of ernakulam antony moses a.k.a. rascal moses (prithviraj sukumaran) involved in an accident which causes him, a partial memory loss. before the accident, he was on a call with his brother-in-law farhan aman (rahman), commissioner of police. he informs farhan that he has solved the murder case of his friend, acp aryan john jacob (jayasurya), who was killed during a gallantry awards ceremony at the police parade ground. but, before disclosing the name of the murderer, the accident occurs resulting in the partial memory loss. 
farhan tells antony, about his past and the tragedy that occurred to their friend, aryan. his capabilities as a police officer being impressive, farhan reassigns antony moses back on the case despite the memory loss. what follows is a nonlinear narrative with many surprises in store, as antony moses retraces his steps back to the killer, and faces some bitter truths.


== cast ==
prithviraj sukumaran as acp antony moses ips
jayasurya as acp aryan john jacob ips
rahman as commissioner farhan aman ips
aparna nair as asp rakhee menon ips
hima davis as rebecca
captain raju as igp gopinathan nair ips
kunchan as asi sudhakaran nair
harish uthaman as roy
riyaz khan as sharpshooting expert
shweta menon as dr. tanuja nair
mukundan as captain sreenivasa kartha
deepa rahul easwar as annie farhan


== production ==
shooting started in january 2013, and the movie was released in may 2013.


== reception ==
sify and indiaglitz.com called mumbai police one of the best recent malayalam films. paresh of rediff.com called the film a " good suspense thriller which will make history for its interesting story." aswin of the times of india says that the film " arrests and engages the audience with bold portrayals from a well-chosen cast."veeyen of nowrunning.com praised the writing and said the "dark lined elegance that the movie sports, makes it a gritty, knotty thriller  a hardboiled treat."shekhar of oneindia.in praised the narrative and said the story has surprises.


== references ==


== external links ==
mumbai police on facebook
mumbai police at imdb