munafik 2 (lit.'hypocrite 2') is a 2018 malaysian supernatural horror film directed and written by syamsul yusof. a sequel to munafik (2016) and the second instalment in a planned munafik trilogy, the film stars syamsul himself, fizz fairuz, maya karin, nasir bilal khan, fauzi nawawi, mawi, rahim razali and indonesian actress, weni panca.filming began from march to may 2017 in kuala lumpur, the film was released on 30 august 2018 and became commercial success. the third sequel is in development with syamsul returned to direct, wrote the screenplay and reprised his role. in december 2018, munafik 2 was listed by the local malaysian newspaper harian metro as among the top 10 local films in malaysian history.


== plot ==
two years after the events of the first movie, the life of ustaz adam (syamsul yusof) was restored after being interrupted by the death of his wife and son. he becomes a preacher and continues his responsibility to help the people affected by black magic and jins. the previous tests have taught him to offer tawadhu to the divine. but what's strange is, adam has been constantly haunted by his past nightmares involving maria's death. adam is also often visited by a mysterious woman who questions him about god's faith and destiny. meanwhile, the village across live a sakinah (maya karin) and her daughter, aina.
sakinah was forced to take care of her father, imam malik who has a mysterious illness. sakinah's poor life was put to the test when she and her daughter have been disturbed several times by the devil. sakinah believed what she faced comes from abu jar (nasir bilal khan), a hypocrite and head of heresy in the same village. abu jar has a lot of followers and feared among the villagers. sakinah or anyone who still holds islam is the enemy of abu jar.
abu jar uses black magic and jin to destroy anyone who does not follow his teachings. this forces sakinah to search for ustaz adam. the arrival of ustaz adam from the village across drive abu jar mad. adam was not only surprised by what happened to the sakinah family but also with the deviant teachings of abu jar who deflected the faith of the muslims in the village.


== cast ==
syamsul yusof as ustaz adam
maya karin as sakinah
fizz fairuz as ustaz azman
nasir bilal khan as abu jar
mawi as azhar
fauzi nawawi as umar
rahim razali as rahim
namron as rahman
roslan salleh as imam malik
ku faridah as salmah
nur zara sofia as aina
weni panca as mystery woman


== production ==
the film was officially announced in april 2016, two months after the release of the first film. in march 2017, nabila huda announced her departure from being the cast members of munafik 2 due to scheduling conflicts. syamsul announced that maya karin will be joined cast members and being chosen to cast as sakinah. nasir bilal khan, best known for television roles was cast as abu jar, a muslim deviant cult leader; munafik 2 was his second film with syamsul after bohsia: jangan pilih jalan hitam (2009). fauzi nawawi was cast as umar, abu jar's right-hand man; for this film, he took his mother's advice before taking the role.the filming budget was estimated at rm2.8 million compared to its predecessor's filming cost which estimated at rm1.5 million. principal photography began on 20 march 2017 in various places including kuala lumpur, klang valley as well as chini lake in pahang and filming wrapped on 30 may 2017.


== surahs used ==
there are more than 10 surahs in the al-quran used in munafik 2 which used as a protective verses to avoid black magic and disturbance from weird creatures. these surahs are:


== release ==


=== reception ===
munafik 2 was released on 30 august 2018 in malaysia and in indonesia on 26 september 2018.the film grossed rm2.05 million on the official opening day, thus overcoming mamat khalids horror comedy hantu kak limah which only collected rm650,000. munafik 2 grossed more than rm3.6 million on its first day of official premiere and successfully managed to top the gsc movie charts, behind over five other films including the equalizer 2, crazy rich asians and hantu kak limah 3. the film succeeded in creating a distinctive history in the malay film industry when it collected box-office gross rm 21.6 million within four days, against its predecessor. munafik 2 managed to garner a record high of rm30 million within 10 days, compared to the predecessor which earned rm 17.04 million. as of september 2018, the film managed to collect rm35 million gross, much higher than its predecessor as well as hantu kak limah. as of november 2018, munafik 2 garnered box office gross a total of rm48 million for malaysia, brunei, singapore and indonesia with rm37.74 million to within malaysia at that time.


=== media release ===
beginning 1 may 2019, munafik 2 is available for streaming at netflix.


== sequel ==
when asked about the sequel to munafik 2, syamsul said he did not rule out the possibility of directing the third film and planned to make it a media franchise. he said in an interview with utusan malaysia: "the script for the third munafik film has yet to be completed but i have a plot in mind. ive always had plans to make munafik a trilogy since the first film in 2016," he later confirms that the third sequel, munafik 3 will began filming in 2019. though the film is originally planned to be released in 2020, however, the anticipated film did not materialise due to the ongoing covid-19 pandemic.


== see also ==
list of islamic films


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
munafik 2 at imdb
munafik 2 on netflix