musafir (translation: traveller) is a 2004 indian hindi-language action thriller film written,directed and produced by sanjay gupta starring anil kapoor, aditya pancholi, sameera reddy and sanjay dutt in the lead roles and introducing koena mitra. the film was controversial because of some sensual scenes, including kissing, between kapoor and reddy. at the box office the film opened to almost near housefull collections of 80%100% all over india but witnessed a steep fall by the end of its first week of release. it was the sixteenth highest grossing hindi film of the year. the film is a remake of the 1997 hollywood film u turn.


== plot ==
lucky (anil kapoor) is a small-time criminal, hoping to retire with his girlfriend lara (koena mitra) after one last job. unfortunately for him, things do not go as planned and he becomes involved with a ruthless killer billa (sanjay dutt). lucky steals 2.5 million from billa. but lara steals it from him instead. he, then, comes to know that his friends have been murdered. billa tracks lucky down. but lucky is able to strike a deal. he is to go to goa and meet jacko (shakti kapoor) and sell him a bag of unknown contents. he then meets jacko and sets a rendezvous. on his return to his hotel, he comes across a police inspector (aditya pancholi) who seems to have become suspicious of lucky.
in a small restaurant, he sights a dancer sam (sameera reddy). he follows her and gets an opportunity to meet her when her car breaks down. he offers her a lift home. she introduces herself as sam. when her husband, lukka (mahesh manjrekar) shows up, they retrieve her car from the road, and go home. that night lucky arrives in a disco to meet jacko again. here he again comes across sam. after getting the money, lucky prepares to leave the next morning. sam arrives at lucky's hotel to meet him. but their meeting is cut short when lucky notices the same inspector. he tells sam to hide and hides the bag of money in the vehicle of an unsuspecting motorist. by the time the inspector leaves, the vehicle with the money is gone. meanwhile, billa tracks down lara, gets the money back and kills her.
while billa hides the fact that he has his money back, lucky hides that he has lost the money. he again comes across lukka. it turns out that he wants lucky to kill sam and in return, lucky would get 2.5 million. sam meets lucky and sets up a deal that if lucky would kill lukka she would pay him 2.5 million. both of them want the work done that night. during a drink, sam bends down and lukka has temptations on her and asks her to remove her blouse, but she refuses and lukka forcefully unzips her, attempts to assault sam and sam accidentally shoots him dead. lucky, however, gets the money and both try to get out of goa. but the inspector is following them. sam identifies the inspector as lukka's brother tiger and the 2.5 million actually belong to tiger. lucky somehow shakes tiger off his pursuit, and hides the money. the next morning she is nowhere to be found. lucky desperately searches for her and when he finally finds her he realises that he has fallen in love with her. suddenly they are attacked by inspector tiger with his police force.
lucky is running out of ammunition when billa arrives and shoots down all the police officers. tiger, however, manages to escape by making sam his hostage. at gunpoint, lucky agrees to take billa to the place where the money is hidden. when they reach the platform, lucky finds that tiger has discovered the money. a fist-to-fist duel ensues between tiger and lucky, but billa intervenes and strikes a final deal. both lucky and tiger have to walk on two parallel railway tracks blindfolded. the person towards whom the train comes is gone....if lucky survives then he will get the girl, while billa will take the money, but if tiger is saved, he gets the money and billa will take the girl.
the train however changes tracks at the last moment and heads towards lucky. sam screams in horror and pleads with billa to let her go. from sam's scream, tiger comes to know that lucky is doomed. he takes off his blindfold and waves a farewell at lucky. but he is promptly shot dead by billa (because billa notices the bracelet that was on tiger's wrist that belonged to his now dead comrade). he then allows sam to run to lucky and try to save him. she does pull him off the tracks before the train could reach him. billa smiles and rides away on his bike. after going a short distance, he stops and drops the bag to the ground in a brief act of generosity and then goes away.


== trivia ==
the tv presenter konnie huq appears as an extra in the club scene of the film.


== cast ==
anil kapoor as lucky
sanjay dutt as billa
sameera reddy as sam
aditya pancholi as inspector tiger
mahesh manjrekar as lukka
shakti kapoor as whacko jacko
koena mitra as lara
manoj pahwa
ashwini kalsekar as angela
pankaj kalra


== critical reception ==
avijit ghosh wrote in the telegraph: "musafir is the sort of flick guys like when they watch it with buddies and pretend to hate when they carry girlfriends or wives along. slick and stylised like his earlier effort, kaante, director sanjay gupta's new film is about smart-talking men without morals. and cool women without both clothes and morals.


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film was composed by vishal-shekhar. anand raj anand composed one track "ishq kabhi kario na". four tracks in the album are remixes of the original ones from kaante. dev kohli, kumaar, vishal dadlani and milap zaveri provided the lyrics. the music was applauded by critics and audience for being experimental and different. the compositions of vishal-shekhar heavily used techno and trance beats and the album itself was divided into two cds"club" and "longue". songs like "ishq kabhi kario na", "saaki" and "door se paas" were highly popular among the youth. vishal-shekhar made kumar sanu sing a techno song "phir na kehna", a very rare western-style song for kumar sanu. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 18,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's seventh highest-selling. the song "saki" was recreated for film batla house.songs rabba was recreated in daaka and door se paas will be recreated in the movie satyameva jayate 2.

*originally featured in kaante.


== references ==


== external links ==
musafir at imdb