an angel at my table is a 1990 biographical drama film directed by jane campion.  the film is based on janet frame's three autobiographies, to the is-land (1982), an angel at my table (1984), and the envoy from mirror city (1984). the film was very well received, winning multiple awards including at the new zealand film and television awards, the toronto international film festival and received second prize at the venice film festival.


== synopsis ==
an angel at my table is a dramatisation of the autobiographies of new zealand author janet frame. originally produced as a television mini-series, the film, as with frame's autobiographies, is divided into three sections, with the lead role played by three actresses who portray frame at different stages of her life: alexia keogh (child), karen fergusson (adolescent), and kerry fox (adult). the film follows frame from when she grows up in a poor family, through her years in a mental institution, and into her writing years after her escape.


== cast ==
kerry fox as janet frame (adult)
alexia keogh as janet frame (child)
karen fergusson as janet frame (adolescent)
iris churn as mother
kevin j. wilson as father
melina bernecker as myrtle
glynis angell as isabel
mark morrison as bruddie frame (child)
sarah llewellyn as june frame (child)
natasha gray as leslie
brenda kendall as miss botting
martyn sanderson as frank sargeson


== awards ==
new zealand film and tv awards (1990):
best cinematography: stuart dryburgh
best director: jane campion
best film
best performance in supporting role: martyn sanderson
best female performance: kerry fox
best screenplay: laura jones
toronto international film festival (1990):
international critics award: jane campion
valladolid international film festival (1990):
best actress: kerry fox
venice film festival (1990)
elvira notari prize: jane campion
filmcritica "bastone bianco" award: jane campion
grand special jury prize: jane campion
little golden lion award: jane campion
ocic award: jane campion
belgian syndicate of cinema critics (ucc) (1992):
grand prix
chicago film critics association (cfca) (1992):
cfca award: best foreign language film
independent spirit awards (1992)
best foreign film: jane campion


== impact and reception ==
an angel at my table was the first film from new zealand to be screened at the venice film festival, where it received multiple standing ovations and was awarded the grand special jury prize despite evoking yells of protest that it did not win the golden lion. in addition to virtually sweeping the local new zealand film awards, it also took home the prize for best foreign film at the independent spirit awards and the international critics' award at the toronto international film festival. the film not only established jane campion as an emerging director and launched the career of kerry fox, but it also introduced a broader audience to janet frame's writing.
roger ebert gave the film 4 out of 4 stars, stating; "[the film] tells its story calmly and with great attention to human detail and, watching it, i found myself drawn in with a rare intensity". the film also received praise in the guardian where derek malcolm called it "one of the very best films of the year". the sydney morning herald described the film as "deeply moving" and "visionary" while variety described it as being "totally absorbing".


== references ==


== external links ==
an angel at my table at imdb
an angel at my table at rotten tomatoes
an angel at my table at turner classic movies
nz on screen page
an angel at my table at oz movies
an angel at my table: alone, naturally an essay by amy taubin at the criterion collection