my big father is a malayalam movie by mahesh p. sreenivasan (assistant director-sajith jagadnandan) starring  guinness pakru and jayaram. it was released in december 2009. the movie was produced by p.a. sebastian and was distributed by casino pictures.
my big father is about a father and son, where the father is a dwarf. the role of the father is played by the two feet tall guinness pakru. jayaram plays the role of the son. the film sets a big release over 110 screens in kerala. the film was a boxoffice success.


== plot summary ==
kunjumon (guinness pakru) lands up in kochi with an infant in hand. he approaches a teashop owner thomas kutty (innocent), with a recommendation letter, who says there is no scope for him there as the shop is on the verge of closing down. by the time the credits end, the business has turned around and the infant has grown up.
the boy grows up to be a strapping young man alby (jayaram), dancing on the beaches of goa with his father and a bunch of dancers for company.
we see that the father too has 'grown up,' sporting a handle bar moustache with salt and pepper hair. he is now the owner of a successful catering firm, managed by his former employer.
everything is hunky dory and things stay in a comedic vein; the inkling of conflict comes in the form of a vow taken by alby that he will not marry a girl who laughs at his father. as luck would have it, alby falls in love with ancy (kanika), whom he spots in a shopping mall, and they get married. but things do not move smoothly, leading kunjumon to ostracization from his own family and to contemplating suicide. kunjumon is taken to the hospital, the doctor says that his head is seriously injured, which will cause some changes in his afterlife such as he will not remember anyone, and he might behave like a child.


== cast ==


== songs ==
the songs were written by vayalar sarath chandra varma and tuned by alex paul.

"nira thinkale": k. j. yesudas
"nira thinkale": manjari
"appa chattambi": shyam prasad
"mohichille": m. g. sreekumar, rimi tomi


== references ==


== external links ==
my big father at imdb