my sexiest year is a 2007 romantic comedy/drama starring frankie muniz and harvey keitel and was written and directed by howard himelstein. the film is a romantic coming-of-age story in which the kindness bestowed by a glamorous model is returned 30 years later by the young man in whom she inspired the first stirrings of confidence and love. the film takes place in 1970s miami and was shot in various locations such as collins avenue and coral gables high school.
the film had its world premiere at the 2007 hamptons international film festival. as of 2016, the film has yet to receive a dvd/blu-ray release date.


== plot ==
jake stein (frankie muniz) is a 17-year-old who lives with his sick mother and grandfather in brooklyn. he wants nothing more than to be a writer, but when his mothers health takes a turn for the worse, jake is sent to miami to live with his father, zowie (harvey keitel), a small-time handicapper who gives horse racing tips for a living. not much of a parent, zowie has shirked his fatherly responsibilities for most of his sons life. nonetheless, jake is excited about the prospects of bonding with his father in sunny miami.
jake quickly befriends mark, a local rich kid, whose excessive drug use helps him get through the pressures of teenage life in southern florida, where the "in" crowd only cares about how much money one's parents make, whos coming to one's pool party, and whether or not one is getting laid. as jake tries to navigate the waters of his new homewhile trying to connect with his eccentric fatherhe meets marina (amber valletta), a famous model who is in town for a photo shoot; the two quickly bond. jake reminds marina of her younger brother, who died in a motorcycle accident, and jake is unable to get over the fact that such a beautiful woman is interested in him. but just when things seem to be going right, all goes terribly wrong. jake must figure out how to become a man, if he is ever going to finish writing his memoir.


== cast ==
other cast members include:

christopher mcdonald
frankie muniz
amber valletta
ryan cabrera
haylie duff
karolna kurkov
frances fisher
allan rich
victor alfieri
nick zano
rachel specter
dan levy
daphna kastner


== references ==


== external links ==
my sexiest year at imdb
my sexiest year at rotten tomatoes