mystic pizza is a 1988 american romantic comedy-drama film directed by donald petrie and starring annabeth gish, julia roberts, and lili taylor. the film marked petrie's feature film directorial debut and matt damon's film debut.


== plot ==
sisters kat and daisy arajo and their friend jojo barbosa are three portuguese-american teenage girls working as waitresses at mystic pizza, a pizza parlor owned by leona in the fishing town of mystic, connecticut.
kat and daisy are total opposites. kat, the younger sister, is an aspiring astronomer working at the planetarium in the whaling museum of the mystic seaport, and yale university accepted her on a partial scholarship. kat works at the restaurant and as a babysitter to raise money for school. daisy's goal is to have as much fun as possible. their mother is pleased with kat, while often questioning daisy's life choices.
daisy meets charles, a rich young man from the other side of the tracks, at a bar. the two are immediately attracted to each other and begin a relationship, much to her mother's dismay. at a family dinner, charles's relatives unintentionally make insensitive comments about daisy's ethnicity, and charles overreacts. daisy breaks up with him, accusing him of using her to rebel against his parents.
kat finds herself infatuated with her employer tim, an architect and yale graduate, who hired her to babysit his four-year-old daughter phoebe while his wife works in england. a relationship ultimately develops between them that she believes to be love, and they have sex. however, when his wife returns, kat's illusions are shattered. daisy consoles her devastated sister, and they bond.
jojo fainted at her wedding to bill because she had cold feet about making a lifetime commitment. nonetheless, she wants to continue having a sex with bill until she is ready to be married. bill eventually breaks up with her because she will not make a commitment.
a famous television food critic called "the fireside gourmet" unexpectedly visits mystic pizza. as kat, daisy, jojo, and leona watch from the counter, he takes a few bites of one pizza slice, jots notes in his notebook, and leaves after paying the check. his approval can do wonders for a restaurant, but they are not optimistic. however, a few days later he gives the pizzeria his highest rating, calling the pizza "superb". the restaurant phone immediately starts ringing, with leona laughing as she informs the caller that no reservations are needed.
in the end, tim brings phoebe to mystic pizza because she wants to say goodbye to kat. tim gives her a check to help cover her tuition expenses, but she tears it up; she later accepts money from leona. jojo finally marries bill, and daisy and charles reconcile at the wedding. the film ends with the three girls overlooking the water from the restaurant's balcony, reminiscing about their time together and wondering about the future.


== cast ==
annabeth gish as katherine "kat" arajo
julia roberts as daisy arajo
lili taylor as josefina "jojo" barbosa
vincent d'onofrio as william "bill" montijo
william r. moses as tim travers
adam storke as charles gordon windsor, jr.
conchata ferrell as leona
joanna merlin as mrs. arajo
porscha radcliffe as phoebe travers
louis turenne as hector "the fireside gourmet" freshette
janet zarish as nicole "nikki" travers
arthur walsh as manny
john cunningham as charles gordon windsor, sr.
ann flood as polly windsor
suzanne shepherd as aunt tweedy
gene amoroso as mr. barbosa
sheila ferrini as mrs. barbosa
john fiore as jake
lauren o'brien as serena
matt damon as steamer windsor
jack ringstad as uncle ned
jody raymond as teresa
dennis paiva as himself (portuguese-american wedding singer)


== production and filming locations ==

the title of the film was inspired by a pizza shop in mystic, connecticut. screenwriter amy holden jones was summering in the area and chose mystic pizza as the focus of her story about the lives of three young waitresses.jones was set to direct, but was replaced by petrie, who made his feature film directorial debut. the film was also alfred uhry's screenwriting debut.

filming began october 12, 1987 and was due to last six weeks. the film's plot is set in mystic, but most of the filming locations were in neighboring towns. the building used for the pizza restaurant was a converted home in stonington borough at 70 water st. after the film's release, the real-life mystic pizza building in downtown mystic was renovated to resemble the film set. the windsor family home, the wedding reception restaurant, the peg leg pub pool hall, and the fishing docks were also filmed in stonington borough. the hitchhiking incident takes place on north main street in stonington town. the arajo home is in pawcatuck, connecticut; the lobster business and the wedding church are in noank, connecticut. tim travers' home and the windsors' country club are in watch hill, rhode island. the most notable scenes that take place in mystic were filmed at the mystic seaport planetarium and at the mystic river bascule bridge.


== release ==
goldwyn spent a company record $6.5 million on prints and advertising and other marketing activities, including tie-ins with domino's pizza and others. the film had 100 pre-opening screenings and premiered in mystic, connecticut on october 18, 1988. it was released on october 21, 1988.


== reception ==
the film received mostly favorable reviews, who praised the performances by the three lead actresses. it received "two thumbs up" from popular film critics siskel and ebert, giving particular praise to the three female leads, including gish, whom ebert likened to a "young katharine hepburn". he also noted that the film "may someday become known for the movie stars it showcased back before they became stars." variety called it "a deftly told coming-of-age story about three young femmes as they explore their different destinies, mostly through romance, its genuine and moving, with enough edge to impress contemporary audiences."the film currently has a rotten tomatoes score of 75% from 24 reviews. the website's critics consensus reads: "mystic pizza is like its namesake food: it's cheesy, topped with romance, and rises to the occasion." metacritic gave a score of 60 based on ten reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews".


== home media ==
on january 13, 2009, mystic pizza and say anything... were released as a double feature on dvd. on april 5, 2011, mystic pizza was released on blu-ray.


== musical adaptation ==
on january 22, 2019, it was announced that mystic pizza will be adapted into a stage musical. melissa etheridge will write the score, while gordon greenberg will direct and co-write the book with sas goldberg. this comes years after a fictional broadway musical adaptation of the film had served as a plot point in the early part of season 2 of the nbc sitcom 30 rock in 2007.


== see also ==
little italy (2018 film), a 2018 romantic film in the same pizza environment.


== references ==


== external links ==
mystic pizza at imdb
mystic pizza at the american film institute catalog
mystic pizza at allmovie
mystic pizza at box office mojo
mystic pizza at rotten tomatoes