nadiya ke paar (transl.across the river) is a 1982 indian awadhi language drama film directed by govind moonis (dube). based on the first half of the hindi novel kohbar ki shart by keshav prasad mishra, the movie is set in jaunpur, uttar pradesh. it featured an ensemble cast comprising sachin, sadhana singh, inder thakur, mitali, savita bajaj, sheela david, leela mishra and soni rat. the film was recorded a "super hit" at the box office.the film was released on 1 january 1982, rajshri productions produced the film. the movie was later remade in 1994 by rajshri productions as hum aapke hain koun..!, which was dubbed in telugu under the title premalayam.


== plot ==
the story is based on the first half of a hindi novel, kohbar ki shart by keshav prasad mishra. a brahman farmer from eastern uttar pradesh lives with his two nephews. he falls ill and is treated by a vaidya (indigenous medical practitioner) from another village. when the farmer feels okay, he asks the vaidya about his fees. the vaidya asks for the farmer's eldest nephew to marry his eldest daughter. the farmer readily agrees.
omkar (inder thakur) marries the vaidya's elder daughter roopa (mitali), and they start living happily. roopa gives birth to a baby. during roopa's pregnancy, her younger sister gunja (sadhana singh) comes to live with her. while there, she falls in love with omkar's younger brother chandan (sachin).
learning of their love, roopa promises to help them marry. but, she dies in an accident; and nobody else knows about the love affair. the farmer and the vaidya decide that gunja should marry the widower omkar, to take care of her sister's baby. but moments before the wedding rituals are completed, chandan and gunja's love affair is revealed. he is allowed to marry gunja with everyone's consent.
the rural culture and languages of uttar pradesh are portrayed authentically in the film. the movie is based on the first half of the novel. it changes the partners in the second marriage, as the novel had the proposed marriage between gunja and omkar taking place. the novel proceeded with the development of their relationship, where omkar dies of illness and eventually gunja also dies leaving chandan alone.
most of the film was shot at kerakat, jaunpur, uttar pradesh.


== cast ==
sachin  chandan tiwari; omakar's younger brother
sadhana singh  gunja tiwari; vaidji's youngest daughter; roopa's younger sister ; chandan's love interest and turned - wife
mitali  roopa tiwari; vaidji elder daughter; gunja's elder sister; omkar's wife; chandhan sister in - law.
vishnukumar vyas - vaidji (gunja's and roopa father)
leela mishra  kaki
inder thakur  omkar tiwari
ram mohan  farmer (uncle of omkar and chandan)
sheela sharma -rajjo (chandan's childhood friend / had a crush on chandan)


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the album was composed by the famous music composer ravindra jain. the movie contains many melodious songs which are given below. songs like "kaun disaa mein le ke" and "jogiji dheere dheere" are still popular.


== later events ==
inder thakur, who played omkar, died in the crash of air india flight 182.


== references ==


== external links ==
nadiya ke paar at imdb 
nadiya ke paar at bollywood hungama