splatter: naked blood (, : naked blood, naked blood: megyaku), literally, naked blood: mischief, is a 1996 japanese horror film directed by hisayasu sat. it is a remake of sat's 1987 film, genuine rape (, boko honban), and, according to allmovie, "contains one of the most appalling scenes in japanese horror." the film is not pornographic and contains only a mild sex scene near the end of the film.


== plot ==
a scientist named eiji has developed a new chemical called "myson" that can turn pain into pleasure and also drastically increases the pain threshold of those who receive the drug, causing them to become immune to pain. he decides to put three girls who attend a different experiment held by eiji's motherthis experiment involving a clinical trial of a soon-to-be-released contraceptiveto the test. meanwhile, eiji has a crush on one of the girls, rika. myson influences the girls gradually, and eiji discovers that his experiment is going horribly wrong when he finds out the drug results in too many endorphines being produced in the bodies of the people who take it when they become injured, causing them to inflict greater and greater harm on themselves to experience the same amount of pleasure. nevertheless, eiji continues with the experiment to observe what happens next.
the first woman, who regularly indulges in gluttony, wishes to have the best food in the world, but she ends up cooking and consuming various parts of her body, notably, her labia. the second woman, who is extremely vain and self-conscious, wishes to have the thinnest and most beautiful body in the world. however, noticing hairs and pores all over her body, she tries to mutilate herself, piercing her skin all over with needles and jewellery before rika intervenes. shortly afterwards, both the first and second of the three women are found dead.
rika does not seem to be influenced by myson, but eiji finds out that it has turned her into a homicidal murderer who gets enjoyment from witnessing the pain and suffering of her victims, and that she killed the other two girls. he impregnates her, but dies. she survives, and bears his son. eiji's mother is frequently visited by his father. eventually, he pulls open her abdomen (which was cut open previously by rika) and climbs inside.in the final scene, set several years later, rika and her young son, also named eiji, have apparently perfected myson, and depart on a motorcycle to administer a vaporised version of the drug to the population of a city.


== cast ==
misa aika as rika
yumika hayashi as gluttonous woman
mika kirihara as  vain woman
sadao abe as eiji kure
masumi nakao as yuki kure, eiji's mother
tadashi shiraishi as eiji's father
seiya hiramatsu as eiji, the son of eiji kure and rika


== see also ==
japanese horror


== notes ==


== bibliography ==
mcroy, jay (2005). "cultural transformation; corporeal prohibitions and body horror in sato hisayasu's naked blood".  in mcroy, jay (ed.). japanese horror cinema. honolulu: university of hawaii press. isbn 0-8248-2990-5.
mcroy, jay (2008). nightmare japan: contemporary japanese horror cinema. contemporary cinema. 4. rodopi. pp. 4959. isbn 978-90-420-2331-4.
firsching, robert. "megyaku: naked blood". allmovie. retrieved 24 january 2008.
  (in japanese). japanese movie database. retrieved 24 january 2008.


== external links ==
naked blood at imdb
naked blood at allmovie