nannaku prematho (transl.to father, with love) is a 2016 indian telugu-language action thriller film written and directed by sukumar and produced by b. v. s. n. prasad under sri venkateswara cine chitra, bhogavalli bapineedu and reliance entertainment. the film, set in london, stars n. t. rama rao jr. and rakul preet singh, while jagapathi babu and rajendra prasad play supporting roles. nannaku prematho marks the 25th film of rama rao jr. as an actor.
devi sri prasad has composed the film's music and background score. the cinematography was provided by vijay c chakravarthy, and naveen nooli edited the film. principal photography commenced in august 2015. the audio launch of this film was held on 27 december 2015. the film was released worldwide on 13 january 2016. it is being remade in bengali as baazi (2021).


== plot ==
abhiram (jr. ntr), the youngest son of london-based subramanyam (rajendra prasad), quits his job and starts his own company, kmc pipes and canals. he comes to know that his father is suffering from pancreatic cancer and has roughly a month or more to live. subramanyam reveals his name as ramesh chandra prasad, one of london's richest entrepreneurs, who lost all his wealth because of a cunning man, krishnamurthy kautilya (jagapathi babu), who made his empire cheating ramesh chandra. he was then forced to change his name to subramanyam and got rich again after years of work. subramanyam requests his three sons to take revenge on his behalf. his first son lies to him that he has filed a lawsuit against krishnamurthy in order to pacify him, but abhiram ends up taking matters into his own hands. he sets a time period of 30 days to bring krishnamurthy to zero and hires three youngsters who are shown to love their fathers dearly. he targets krishnamurthy's daughter divyanka (rakul preet singh) in order to reach him. he uses all methods necessary to woo her, including saving her from a kidnapping and spending every last penny of their family bank balance to buy her a 25 crore worth painting. he finally meets krishnamurthy at divya's birthday party, but krishnamurthy turns out to be aware of abhiram's intentions.
subramanyam gets admitted to the hospital as his condition turns critical. abhiram's brothers (rajiv kanakala and srinivas avasarala) break up with him after they come to know that abhiram wasted their property on the painting. krishnamurthy plants a bug in abhiram's lair because of which he comes to know of their plans, and divya too comes to know of abhiram's intentions and breaks up with him. krishnamurthy had grabbed a gas project from businessman kapil sinha (ashish vidyarthi) in spain, to where he goes with divya. abhiram follows them with his group but gets kidnapped by divya. she does so as she wants to find his plans of ruining her father. during this period, abhiram regains divya's love and also gets her to meet her mother (madhoo) in jail, whom she had not met since she was four years old and reveal her mysterious dream. her father had put drugs in their bag during one of their travels, but the airport officials find the bag with divya's mother when krishnamurthy and divya were in the washroom. krishnamurthy leaves his wife to save himself and his daughter. divya begins to loathe her father.
meanwhile, it turns out that the painting gifted to krishnamurthy had a camera in it and that abhiram too was aware of krishnamurthy's plans. he finds out krishnamurthy's bank number and accesses the account, transferring the 35,000 crores to his family account. it is also revealed that the gas land that krishnamurthy grabbed was no real gas land and the gas there was given by tunnels planted by abhiram's kmc company: krishnamurthyni mosam chese company (cheating krishnamurthy company). kapil is revealed to be satpal singh, subramanyam's friend. krishnamurthy becomes of the same condition as ramesh chandra prasad and absconds and changes his identity to subramanyam. divya and her mother move in with abhiram's family, but sadly, ramesh chandra succumbs to his disease. abhiram still does not cry as he thinks that his father will go the day he cries.


== cast ==


== production ==


=== development ===
in may 2015, sukumar came up with the story of the film. in august 2015, the film's shooting had started, and by december, the post-production was done. the film's first look poster had released on 17 september 2015 on the occasion of vinayaka chavithi. the film's teaser was released on 21 october 2015 on the occasion of vijayadasami (dasara) festival. the teaser created a record of being the most liked and viewed telugu film teaser at the time. another poster was released as a deepavali special, featuring a dancing still of jr. ntr.


=== casting ===
rakul preet singh was selected to play the female lead role opposite jr. ntr. rajendra prasad plays the role of jr. ntr's father in this film. initially it was rumoured that jagapati babu and ntr's own father nandamuri harikrishna were approached to play ntr's father role in the movie, but due to some reasons, both had refused. jagapati babu is instead playing the main negative role.


=== filming ===
principal photography commenced in the united kingdom. it was a 40-day schedule where all the actors took part. the mrmc bolt high speed cinebot, the fastest camera robot in the world which is used to obtain shots of extremely high speed objects with absolute detail, was used in some crucial scenes during the uk schedule. after wrapping up the uk schedule, the team returned to hyderabad. while sukumar was directing nannaku prematho, he was simultaneously producing the movie kumari 21f, so he took a break because kumari 21f was nearing its release date. the nannaku prematho team then finished some part of the title song shoot in hyderabad near toopran. afterwards, the team shifted to spain for the final schedule of the film. the movie team wrapped up its spain schedule by end of december 2015. finally, the team shifted back to hyderabad to shoot a few final sequences. the shooting wrapped on 5 january 2016.


== soundtrack ==
music of this film was composed by devi sri prasad, who collaborated for the fifth time with both jr. ntr and sukumar. the audio rights were bought by junglee music.after the death of satyamurthy, prasad's father and former film screenplay and story writer, the album was dedicated to the former in an audio launch ceremony on 27 december 2015.for the fifth time in his career, jr. ntr lent his vocals for a jazz-style number called follow follow.

behindwoods.com gave the soundtrack 3 out of 5 stars, stating that " nannaku prematho is a fun album with ample dose of trendy as well as mass numbers with a tinge of experimentation. all in all, it is another winner in the combo of sukumar- dsp!". another film news website, indiaglitz.com also rated the album 3 out of 5 stars and stated that "devi sri prasad, sukumar and ntr are an exciting combination. this album brings out this uniqueness in its choice of lyrics.  it is not vintage dsp at his best. all that you can expect from this album is good dose of energy and verve, dsp-style, ntr-style". 123telugu.com quoted this album as a "different album from the crazy combo" and finally stated that "on the whole, the audio of nannaku prematho is quite different from devi sri prasads regular albums. even though the tunes are not in the regular commercial format, they are elevated well by some meaningful and catchy lyrics."


== distribution ==
the overseas theatrical distribution rights were acquired by cinegalaxy inc. for 6.2 crores. ransitech solutions ltd. bagged the uk distribution rights in late october 2015 "reliance" raghu of shantha pictures acquired the ceded distribution rights for 7.2 crores. this is the highest price offered to any movie in this region after baahubali: the beginning, which was bought for 13 crores.


== box office ==
nannaku prematho grossed 68.5 crore (us$9.6 million) worldwide in the first nine days. by the end of its second week had grossed  80 crore (us$11 million).


== critical reception ==
times of india rated the film 3.5/5, and wrote "(the flaws) should be no reason to miss this film because nannaku prematho is like a delectable serving of dessert with a hint of tang. the flavour may seem out of place initially because you arent used to it. but if you try it with an open mind, youd probably savour it."idlebrain.com gave it 3.25/5 and wrote, "the underlying emotion of father-son gets diluted in the complex screenplay and the mind games between hero and villain. its a great effort by sukumar in terms of screenplay and logic. on a whole, nannaku prematho is a commendable concept thriller made on grand scale."business standard stated that ntr, particularly, needs to be lauded for not playing to the gallery and choosing to work with a director who isn't afraid to go against the tide. this is precisely why you want to appreciate sukumar, who, by all means, could have safely made a regular commercial potboiler. but he didn't, and that's what differentiates him from other filmmakers. "nannaku prematho", on the whole, isn't a bad film. only, one wishes it was made even more sensibly.


== accolades ==


== references ==


== external links ==
nannaku prematho at imdb
nannaku prematho at rotten tomatoes