narasimha naidu  is a 2001 indian telugu-language vigilante action drama film produced by m. v. murali krishna under the venkata ramana productions banner, directed by b. gopal, starring nandamuri balakrishna, preeti jhangiani, simran and asha saini . the film has musical score by mani sarma. it was remade into tamil as ezhumalai. actress simran reprised her role in the tamil version. the film was released on 11 january 2001 alongside daggubati venkatesh's devi putrudu and chiranjeevi's mrugaraju.


== plot ==
there are two neighboring villages in rayalaseema. goons head one village, and raghupati naidu (k. viswanath) heads the other. as raghupati naidu is peace-loving, his village is dogged by the misdeeds of goons from the neighboring village. in order to save the future of his village, raghupati naidu asks one male kid from each family to be given for the purpose of saving the village. raghupati naidu selected his fourth son narasimha naidu as his family's contribution towards the security of the village. all these kids will be trained and prepared to protect the village. after 15 years, enters anjali (preeti jhangiani). she is the niece of jaya prakash reddy, who happens to be from the goons' village. he later settled in another village. narasimha naidu sets up a naatya ashram to teach classical dance to the students. anjali falls in love with narasimha naidu at first sight. she joins him as a student and tries to make him fall in love with her.
later on, she comes to know that narasimha naidu is already married and has a child who is growing in up the ashram. narasimha naidu is a widower as his wife sravani (simran) is no more. anjali tries to get closer to the kid so that she can marry narasimha naidu. anjali's parents fix up the marriage of anjali with one of their relatives. when anjali's uncle comes to know that she is in love with a widowed dance master, he attacks him and threatens him that he would kill the kid. when they find anjali missing, the entire battalion of goons invades the ashram of the dance master, only to find that he fled.
narasimha naidu, after coming to know that goons were coming to attack him, vacates the ashram and boards a train. at the same time, anjali too boards the train, though narasimha naidu rejects it. then a fleet of 16 white sumos containing goons chase the train using a parallel road. they overtake the train and stop it forcibly at a station. then, around 100 armed goons surround the train and vie for narasimha naidu's blood. after a couple of minutes, narasimha naidu gets down the train, shows his back to them, and then turns around. the moment the goons realize that the dance master is none other than narasimha naidu, they leave all their arms and run away to save their dear lives. then narasimha naidu tells his past to anjali.
raghupati naidu realizes that no parents in the village are willing to marry off their daughter to narasimha naidu since he is meant for sacrificing for the village's safety. at that point of time, raghupati naidu selects a beautiful girl called sravani for his son. but sravani is too sensitive and hates anything to do with violence. hence, raghupati naidu asks narasimha naidu to act as a soft guy who has the liking for classical dance. after marriage, sravani realizes the fact and decides to live with it. narasimha naidu's three elder brothers arrive along with their families. narasimha naidu has a lot of love and adulation for his brothers, though they treat him very badly, which narasimha naidu takes in a good sense. after a few days, sravani blasts at the guys who are mocking narasimha naidu. then they complain about sravani to narasimha naidu. being upset about this, narasimha naidu sends sravani to her parents' place. at her parents' place, sravani gives birth to a kid.
narasimha naidu's brothers are still upset with the insult that is made to them by sravani and decides to leave back to the usa. they arrange for the police security and they refuse for narasimha naidu to accompany them. during this period, the goons plan to kill narasimha naidu's brothers, wife, and son. then, narasimha naidu arrives at the railway station and saves his brother's family. his wife manages to save her son, but in the process, she is killed. in the present, narasimha naidu beats all the goons and marries anjali.


== cast ==


== crew ==
art: raju
choreography: raghava lawrence, brunda, seenu
fights: vikram dharma
dialogues: paruchuri brothers
lyrics: veturi sundararama murthy, sirivennela sitarama sastry, bhuvanachandra, vennelakanti
playback: sp balu, mano, shankar mahadevan, hariharan, udit narayan, sukhwinder singh, sujatha, kavita krishnamurthy, swarnalatha, harini radhika
music: mani sharma
story  screenplay: chinni krishna
editing: kotagiri venkateswara rao
cinematography: v. s. r. swamy
producer:  m. v. murali krishna
director: b. gopal


== soundtrack ==
mani sharma composed the soundtrack of the film with all topping the musical charts. supreme music company purchased the musical rights of the film.


== release ==
the film created a new record by completing 100 days theatrical run in 105 theatres and an all india record by having 101 shows in just one week. the film ventured far ahead of its competitors, devi putrudu and mrugaraju both of which failed at the box office. the 50 days share of the film amounted to 2.3 million which was a huge amount then. the film collected 2 crores from karnataka. the film collected 29.5 crores from andhra pradesh, 0.4 crores from other parts of india and 0.5 crores overseas. it was also the first telugu film to have a distributor share of 20 crores. the distributor share of the film in andhra region amounted to 20.18 crores while that in karnataka was approximately 0.9 crores.


== awards ==
nandi awardsnandi award for best actor  nandamuri balakrishna


== references ==


== external links ==
narasimha naidu at imdb