naseeb apna apna (transl.each person has their own fate) is a 1986 indian hindi-language starring rishi kapoor, farah naaz and raadhika in the lead roles. the movie is the remake of 1982 tamil film gopurangal saivathillai.


== plot ==
chando is an innocent village girl who does not look beautiful, especially with the hairstyle that makes her look ugly. however, her father's effort does not back off to find a groom for her. kishan is a young salesman who has many dreams about his life and his life partner, but is very scared of his dominant father. kishan's father and chando's father are close friends. seeing his friend's struggle to marry off his daughter, kishan's father arranges marriage for kishan and chando without kishan's consent. kishan gets angry upon his father's decision and is further shocked to see his wife-to-be chando, who is dark skinned and lacks social graces. however, scared of his father, he marries her. kishan hates to live with chando, but innocent chando does not realize her husband's intentions and continues to serve her duties as wife to him.
meanwhile, kishan gets an award for best performance in his job and leaves to receive a medal. he meets a beautiful light-skinned woman, radha, from bombay, who is also an award winner. when he returns to his office, he finds that one of his friends is transferred to bombay, but is not willing to go to bombay. kishan uses this opportunity to escape from his father and ugly wife and opts for the transfer to bombay instead of him. at bombay he accidentally lands up in radha's house and stays there. radha and kishan fall in love and marry.
kishan's father threatens his son to take chando with him, and so kishan unwillingly takes her with him to bombay. but on reaching bombay, he finds radha has come to receive him and leaves chando at the railway station alone and goes away with radha. but when he goes back to the station to find chando, he cannot find her, but instead he meets her in his house as a maid. chando finds that her husband has married another woman and is shocked. chando was brought to kishan's house by his brother-in-law deepak. she does not tell the truth to anyone and decides to stay in their house, as a maid working for her husband.
chando and radha become close friends; chando teaches radha how to be a traditional wife and soon radha begins to see her as an elder sister as she did not have a female figure to teacher her these things. chando swallows the jealousy of radha and kishan's relationship, continuing to be happy and serving them. meanwhile, deepak searches for chando's husband and begins to fall in love with her for her simple and innocent nature. kishan becomes jealous of this, especially when deepak shares with him that he plans to confess and propose soon. chando rejects deepak's proposal, slapping him for his insolent behavior as she has explained how devoted she is to her husband. still, radha and deepak are unaware of the fact that kishan is chando's husband.
ramlal (chando's father) visits bhim (kishan's father) where he is informed that kishan and chando have moved to the city due to the transfer in his job. wanting to see his daughter, ramlal plans to visit them in bombay and bhim accompanies him. chando is shocked upon seeing her father and father-in-law and takes them upstairs to deepak's room - claiming it to be the guest room - explaining that kishan is out of town for a few days. kishan and radha arrive home and chando explains that some villagers have arrived to visit her and she has allowed them to stay in deepak's room for the night. when radha leaves, she tells kishan it is actually their father and to stay in his room and hide until they leave. she promises that she'll get them out by sunrise and to trust her.
ramlal eventually leaves the bedroom to fetch water from the kitchen. he passes radha's bedroom where he can hear her and kishan talking and chando's name is mentioned. he spots a portrait of the couple outside their bedroom. upon arrival to the kitchen, he sees his daughter laying on the floor and is shocked to see what has happened to her life. chando assures him that she is happy and she would rather stay as a maid in this home and be close to her husband than return home with him and become a burden as well as bring shame to both families for kishan's actions. ramlal decides to let his daughter be and leaves with bhim after making an excuse of having to urgently return to the village so that he doesn't learn of the truth.
kishan overheard the conversation in the kitchen between chando and ramlal and is touched by her innocence and thoughtfulness. he blames himself for being a terrible husband and taking notice of beauty over personality and apologies to her. radha then walks in, catching chando and kishan in an embrace.
radha is angered and insults chando but kishan comes clean and explains that he is chando's lost husband. radha insults kishan and goes to kill him with a knife but chando stops her, insisting she be killed instead for ruining their happy marriage. radha drops the knife and walks upstairs, where she shoots herself. she explains that she had a happy time living with kishan but he belongs to chando and asks kishan to take good care of her elder sister.


== cast ==
rishi kapoor as kishan singh
farah naaz as radha singh
raadhika as chando
amrish puri as bhim singh (kishan's father)
satyen kappu as ramlal (chando's father)
seema deo as kishan's mother
rakesh bedi as deepak (radha's brother)


== music ==


== references ==


== external links ==
naseeb apna apna at imdb