nasha (transl.intoxication) is 2013 indian teen coming-of-age erotic film directed by amit saxena. the film is the bollywood debut of shivam patil and poonam pandey. upon release, nasha gained mixed critical response. it cost approximately 40 million (us$560,000) to make and grossed a little over 80 million (us$1.1 million) at the box office.


== plot ==
the story is set in panchgani, a hill station in india. saahil and his friends are a bunch of teenagers in school who have their share of fun and pranks. saahil has a girlfriend called tia. during the summer break, he and his friends are introduced to anita, the new dramatics teacher. she decides to make them perform a play. all the boys in the group fall for her beauty and persona. but its saahil who gets the most intrigued by her. slowly, he realises he cannot think of anything but her. as rehearsals of the play go on, he innocently starts to fantasize about having fun with her.
one day while rehearsing for the play, anita's boyfriend samuel turns up at home and surprises her. anita and sam are a happy couple which makes saahil envious and unhappy. later one night, while returning from a movie, seeing sam and anita cuddle in the car makes him uncomfortable and he tells sam to stop the car and walks back home. sam seeing saahil's emotions tells anita that saahil loves her which anita laughs over. over the next few days, sam to prove his point starts teasing saahil which makes saahil angry and one day while having a race, sam purposefully pushes saahil who gets hurt. anita scolds sam for behaving like a child. saahil's friends now realising that saahil has feelings for anita start teasing him by passing comments about anita and sam. saahil gets offended when he hears them say that sam and anita are having sex every night, and gets into a brawl with his friend. angry and suspicious, he goes to anita's home in the night and enters the house through the window. he's shocked to see anita and sam having sex. heart broken, he is about to leave when he accidentally pushes a table which makes a noise. anita comes out to check and is shocked seeing saahil while saahil sees anita naked. the next morning, saahil comes to anita's house for the rehearsal. anita, extremely angry with him for what he did last night, scolds him and tells him to get out of the play. because of this incident, tia also has a very emotional break up with saahil.
a few days later, anita gets a phone call from the police station. there she comes to know that sam had taken one of her students (who also is saahil's friend) to a rave party. police had conducted a raid where she was caught, and sam somehow escaped. anita and sam have a fight, and sam being drunk, slaps anita and leaves her. saahil comes to know about the fight and goes and meets her. both reconcile. in the evening, he takes some home-made biryani to anita's place to make her feel better, only to find sam there, talking to anita. he is again hurt, and leaves. anita sees him going. the next day, anita goes to saahil's place and meets his uncle and father. upon seeing saahil as he comes out to check who has come, she apologises to him and takes him out for a cup of coffee. here, she tells him that things are finally over between her and samuel, which turns saahil's mood around.
a few days later, anita along with saahil's friends come to his house to celebrate saahil's birthday. after the party, he goes to her house with a wine bottle. they celebrate together, drink, and happen to kiss. but anita realising her mistake, stops him and asks him to leave. anita now knows that she has begun to love saahil, who is heartbroken upon being literally thrown out of the house. later, saahil's uncle and father meet anita to ask her what the matter with saahil is, and anita simply assures them that things will be back to normal in a few days. anita then resigns from her job at school and informs saahil. saahil reaches her house in a desperate attempt to stop her, where a highly emotional showdown takes place between them, and they finally make love. she also confesses her love for him .
later, after anita leaves panchgani, saahil reads her letter to him stating that they have to part ways as what happened between them is not right. and in the future, if they're meant to meet again, they would meet in another time and place, as different individuals. she tells him to forget her. saahil breaks down with a sense of finality as he finishes reading the letter. later, he goes to meet his friends where he reconciles with all of them including tia, as he looks back at this entire experience of his with a new, mature perspective.


== cast ==
poonam pandey as anita
shivam patil as saahil
vishal bhonsle as samuel
mohit chauhan as saahil's uncle
ranbir chakma as tenzin
nation chakma as entertainer
sheetal singh as tia
rohan khurana as sunny
chirag lobo as saahil's friend


== soundtrack ==


== promotion ==
the posters from the film angered few people of mahim area in mumbai. a group of protesters tore the posters and set them on fire on 20 july 2013. the general secretary of shiv sena chitrapat has objected to pandey's skin showing in the advertisements, saying,"we find the poster highly vulgar and derogatory and won't allow such hoardings."


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
nasha gained a mixed critical response. dnaindia gave 2 out of 5 rating. bollywoodlife also rated it 2 out of 5 star. mumbaimirror gave 3 out of 5 stars and stated that "nasha unselfishly makes an attempt to stay away from unnecessary sex and tell a story, but ultimately, like school in summer, it's not got class." however, rediff.com stated as "nasha gives you a nice hangover" giving 3 out of 5 star.


=== box office ===
film had opened with around 3.540 million net in the opening weekend. after the weekend, the film made around 75 million by the 6th day.


== references ==


== external links ==
nasha at imdb