nater guru (bengali:  , "the main culprit") is a bengali movie released in 2003. directed by haranath chakraborty, it featured jeet, koel mallick, ranjit mallick and moushmi chatterjee. the film was koel mallick's cinematic debut. it was successful at the box office.


== plot ==
a romantic comedy based on samaresh basu's populer novel, nater guru revolves around four main leads, robi, shashi bhushan, sulochona and manisha. shashi and sulochona are an estranged couple who are mutually separated from each other but not divorced legally. the separation is out of misunderstandings, egoism and preconceived notions from both sides. after 15 years, sulochona is a business tycoon while shashibushan is a worthless race course bookie. their only daughter manisha is a dancer, and resides with her mother. sulochana suffers a heart attack and manisha unable to get help turns to her father. the father-daughter combo decide that the ailing sulochona can't be given any stress or anxiety. hence they carry a stealth operation. they decide to hire shashi's friend and ally rabi (jeet) maitra and present him as durgadas. rabi is required by manisha to give proxy whenever necessary. he becomes regular. but the two often quarrel and fight over irrelevant issues. rabi gets insulted by the behaviour of manisha. rabi touches sulochona's feet as durgadasand brings forth his singing prowess. the music actually heals sulochona and she is able to walk again. sulochona loves rabi. meanwhile, sulachona accidentally unravels rabi's originality. suluchona admires rabi's honesty and self-esteem. rabi's honesty and simplicity makes manisha fall in love with him. durgadas creates trouble. but with shashi's cooperation the lovers reunite. shashi and sulochona rediscover their long lost love and the couple get reunited.


== cast ==
jeet as rabi maitra
koel mallick as manisha
ranjit mallick as manisha's father
moushmi chatterjee as manisha's mother
kanchan mullick as rabi's friend
nimu bhowmik
ashok mukhopadhyay
pushpita mukherjee as mani
koushik bhattacharya
sachin mullick


== music ==
the album is composed by s. p. venkatesh for nater guru. singers are jhantu, swaran lata, monu, pravakar, anuradha sriram.

all lyrics are written by gautam susmit.


== references ==


== external links ==
nater guru at imdb