naughty boy is a 1962 indian romantic comedy film, starring kishore kumar and kalpana mohan. it was produced and directed by shakti samanta. the music was composed by s. d. burman and he was assisted by his own son r. d. burman. dialogues were written by vrajendra gaur.due to the popularity of them as couple, madhubala and kumar were initially cast in the film. however, director samantha replaced madhubala with mohan due to her illness and poor health condition.


== plot ==
pritam works as a book-keeper in an export import firm and does not have a roof to live under. when he goes to search for accommodation, he runs into a friend, jagdish, who takes him to a rooming house and lets him share one room with himself, kavi viyogi, and bhimsen. the landlady has very strict rules for all her tenants to wit: no one is allowed to romance on her property. on a rainy day when pritam goes to buy milk, he runs into a beautiful girl, neena sharma, their umbrellas get entangled, and when freed get interchanged. he goes to look for her house and finds she lives with her maternal uncle, a music maestro of sorts, and pritam enrolls himself in his class. pritam and neena continue meeting and fall in love with each other. when neena's sister is about to get married, she travels to poona and that's when pritam finds out that her train had an accident and she has been listed as one of the dead. heart-broken and devastated, he is severely depressed, until his co-workers decide that he should go for a picnic and this does cheer him considerably. in this cheerful state, he returns home and decides to carry on with life without neena. it is then neena returns, very much alive, and finds that pritam is not in a state of mourning, but is enjoying life to the fullest. she decides to teach him a lesson that he will never forget. watch what happens when the lesson commences and what impact this has on our care-free friend - who is currently wooing a dancer by the name of edna wong.


== cast ==
bhattacharya
laxmi chhaya...bela
kalpana...meena sharma / edna wong
kamaldeep
tina katkar
nand kishore
krishnakant...kavi viyogi
kishore kumar...pritam
kundan...bhimsen
masood
pachhi
praveen paul...landlady
om prakash...vaidraj churandas "jari-bhuti" chaturvedi
madan puri...r.l. mathur "matur"
rafia
laxman rao
kanu roy
shivraj...mr. sharma
sunder...jagdish
edwina...dancer (uncredited)
marie...dancer (uncredited)
shinde...dancer (uncredited)


== soundtrack ==
for the first time, in this movie, ''manna dey'' sang for kishore kumar. kishore kumar, being extremely busy with acting at this point in his career, did not have time to record all his songs, hence other legendary bollywood playback singers like mohammed rafi, manna dey and mahendra kapoor sang some songs filmed on him during this period.
lyrics: shailendra

ab toh batla are zalimsinger(s): asha bhosle and kishore kumar

dil dhadka usse dekhte hisinger(s): kishore kumar

ho gayi shyam dil badnamsinger(s): manna dey and asha bhosle

jahan bhi gaye hum o mere humdamsinger(s): asha bhosle and kishore kumar

nazren milake jo duniya kisinger(s): kishore kumar

rang yeh duniya badalti haisinger(s): kishore kumar

sa sa sa sa resinger(s): kishore kumar and asha bhosle

tum mere pehchane phir bhisinger(s): asha bhosle


== references ==


== external links ==
naughty boy at imdb
naughty boy at fun vills