nayaki / nayagi is a 2016 telugu-tamil bilingual comedy horror film, directed by goverdhan reddy. the film stars trisha in the lead role, with ganesh venkatraman, satyam rajesh and sushma raj in supporting roles. the film is produced by giridhar mamidipally, who was the former manager of trisha under giridhar production house, and has cinematography by jagadeesh. both versions of the film opened to mixed reviews in mid-2016 and had an above average box office. the film was later dubbed into hindi under the same name for television release on zee cinema on 16 april 2018.


== summary ==
nayaki is about the soul of a woman named gayathri. since the 1980s this soul has been killing people in a village. entry into this village has been restricted by the government of india since people keep on going missing when touring the village. watch this movie to find out why gayathri has been haunting this village for the last 35 years.


== plot ==
the film starts with gayathri wondering to become a heroine and killing someone. the film shifts to a cafe where sanjay, a director is sent to meet his rich would-be-fiance. then he meets a girl who is not rich but it is revealed that she is fooled by him and he made her fall for him. he takes her to an old bungalow with wrong intentions and to shoot it. but gayathri who appears only in camera scares them and reveals his intention to her and gaythri possesses her. sanjay meets gayathri's father's soul and he starts narrating why gayathri hates this type of men.
she wanted to become like sridevi from childhood. one day when a director misbehaved with her, the camera man named yogender helps her. he starts making her dreams true. she develops a liking towards him. but when her father came to know about yogender's character, yogender brutally killed and raped gayathri and her father. it turns out both gayathri and her father had survived in the form of ghosts and the goddess bhadrakali possesses gayathri. she kills yogender in the name of revenge and swears to kill any man who misbehaves with a woman.
the film shifts to present where now sanjay the director feels sad and guilty. he hatches a plan to make her heroine. she enters another body and when another director (brahmanandam) does the same behaviour she slaps him. the film ends with the release of gayathri's film and when asked for sanjay about gayathri he replies that whenever there is wrongdoing she will return.


== cast ==
trisha as gayathri
ganesh venkatraman as yogender
satyam rajesh as sanjay
sushma raj as sandhya
jayaprakash as gayatri's father
brahmanandam as camera man
kovai sarala
manobala
sendrayan as murali krishna
ashwanth thilak
jeevi
poonam kaur in a guest appearance


== production ==
nayaki in telugu and nayagi in tamil was launched in avm studios on 20 august 2015 and the first look posters were revealed to the social medias. the movie was shot simultaneously in both tamil and telugu languages. the film was shot extensively in chennai. the first schedule was completed by the first week of september 2015.


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
nayaki at imdb
nayaki on facebook