nayak, also released under the translated title the hero and as nayak: the hero, is a 1966 indian bengali-language drama film composed, written, and directed by satyajit ray. it was ray's second entirely original screenplay, after kanchenjungha (1962). the story revolves around a matinee idol on a 24-hour train journey from kolkata to delhi to receive a national award. however, he ends up revealing his mistakes, insecurities and regrets to a young journalist, who realises that behind all his arrogant facade lies a deeply troubled man as his life's story is gradually revealed through seven flashbacks and two dreams.


== plot ==
the plot of the film has to some extent been inspired by wild strawberries of ingmar bergman. a famous actor of bengali films, arindam mukherjee (uttam kumar), is invited to the capital, delhi to receive a prestigious award. he travels by the train. the morning newspaper arrives and carries with it an article on an altercation he had been involved in. in the restaurant car, he meets aditi sengupta (sharmila tagore), a young journalist who edits a modern women's magazine, adhunika. filled with contempt for the likes of him, she secretly plans to interview him because she thinks it would attract more readers. he soon starts to reveal his personality, and also brings to surface the inner insecurities and his consciousness of the limitations of his 'powers'. aditi initially takes notes, surreptitiously, but later on, out of empathy almost bordering on pity, stops. however, critical of the star, she interrogates him, leading to further introspection on his part. slowly, his guilt about the way things turned out is very visible.
arindam also mentions shankar-da, his mentor, who had never wanted arindam to join films, being a strong opposer of the medium. he talks about his first day in film, and on the different experiences he faced with other workers in the field and some of the things that happened to them.
toward the end of the train journey, arindam is drunk and feels a need to confide his wrongdoings. he asks the conductor to fetch aditi. he begins to reveal the reason behind the altercation he was a part of, but aditi stops him, as she has already guessed. it was an affair he'd had with one of his co-actors, promila. afraid that he might commit suicide, aditi makes sure he returns to his cubicle, before going back to her own.
as the star re-lives and examines his life with aditi, a bond develops between them. aditi realizes that in spite of his fame and success, arindam is a lonely man, in need of empathy. out of respect for him, she chooses to suppress the story and tears up the notes she has written. she lets the hero preserve his public image.


== cast ==
uttam kumar - arindam mukherjee
sharmila tagore - aditi sengupta
bireswar sen - mukunda lahiri
soumen bose - shankar
nirmal ghosh - jyoti
premangshu bose - biresh
jogesh chatterjee - aghore chattopadhyay
sumita sanyal - promila chatterjee
ranjit sen - haren bose
bharati devi - manorama (mr. bose's wife)
lali chowdhury - bulbul (mr. bose's daughter)
kamu mukherjee - pritish sarkar
susmita mukherjee - molly (mr. sarkar's wife)
subrata sensharma - ajoy
jamuna sinha - sefalika (ajoy's wife)
satya banerjee - swami of wwww organisation
hiralal - kamal misra


== soundtrack ==

all music is composed by satyajit ray.


== production ==
ray wrote the screenplay of the film at darjeeling in may, where he went during off-season from filming. even then he had uttam kumar in his mind for the lead, but not as an actor, rather a "phenomenon". the film was shot in the latter half of 1965.
 letter by ray to marie seton, author of portrait of a director.
i wanted a relationship to develop between the matinee idol and a girl on the train. romance was out  the time being so short  but i wanted something with an interesting development. the transition from apathy mixed with a certain dislike, to sympathetic understanding, seemed a promising one. so i made aditi a slightly snooty sophisticate who questions and resists the easy charm, good looks, sangfroid, etc etc. of the idol, until she discovers theres an area where he is helpless, lonely, and in need of guidance. from the point where he begins to unburden himself, aditi can ignore his faade because shes had a glimpse of what lies beneath. at first he is material for her for a journalistic probe, until the process of unbarring reaches a point where she realizes it would be unethical to exploit it. sympathy and desire to help is the next step. the bond between the two is tenuous, but real. intellectually clearly above him, her goodness consists in providing him with the small area of contact that exists between them..."


== accolades ==
national film award for best feature film in bengali, 1967
bodil award for best non-european film, 1967
special jury award, berlin international film festival, 1966
critics' prize (unicrit award), berlin international film festival, 1966
b.f.j.a best actor award: uttam kumar
b.f.j.a best director award: satyajit ray


== nominations ==
golden bear for best film, berlin international film festival, 1966


== preservation and restoration ==
the film is one of four ray films which were digitally restored and set for a re-release in january 2014.the academy film archive preserved nayak in 2004.


== references ==


== external links ==
nayak (satyajitray.org)
nayak at imdb
nayak at allmovie
nayak at rotten tomatoes
the hero: depths and surfaces an essay by pico iyer at the criterion collection