nayee padosan (english: new neighbour) is a 2003 bollywood comedy film directed by cinematographer b. h. tharun kumar, starring mahek chahal, vikas kalantri, anuj sawhney and aslam khan in the lead roles. the movie is partially inspired by the tamil film indru poi naalai vaa and chashme buddoor. the movie was the directorial debut of b. h. tharun kumar and was a moderate success at the box office. the film was also the bollywood debut of mahek chahal.


== plot ==
the story revolves around the female protagonist or the 'nayee padosan' (mahek chahal) who has shifted into a new locality. her simplicity, righteousness and no-nonsense attitude are qualities any man would want his life partner to possess.
three different boys raju (anuj sawhney), raja (aslam khan) and ram (vikas kalantri) from different backgrounds, characteristics and eventually modus operandi are swept head over heels in love with the girl.
what follows next is a laugh riot, in the way the three eligible bachelors try to get themselves acquainted and eventually outwit one another to get the girl.
the film takes a sudden turn when a new entry prabhu (rahul bhat)  that happens to be a favourite with both the girl and her family shatters the hopes of the three eligible bachelors. nothing seems to stop the inevitable. the battle seems lost for the three hopeless boys.
the film goes through various emotional graphs where the three boys have their individual shares of gains and losses vis-a-vis their competitors. the girl doesn't reveal her feelings until a certain change of events makes her realise whom she really loves and would want to spend the rest of her life with.


== cast ==
mahek chahal as pooja iyengar
anuj sawhney as raju
vikas kalantri as ram
aslam khan as raja
rahul bhat as prabhu double role hamsdhwani in jail
vijay kashyap as shastri iyengar (pooja's dad)
yusuf hussain as dadaji (pooja's grandfather)
shabnam kapoor as pooja's mom


== music ==
the movie soundtrack contains 7 songs composed by the award-winning trio shankarehsaanloy. lyrics were by sameer.


== references ==


== external links ==
nayee padosan at imdb
nayee padosan: complete cast and crew details