nee varuvai ena (english: for you to arrive) is a 1999 indian tamil-language romantic drama film directed by rajakumaran starring parthiban, ajith kumar, and devayani with suvalakshmi in a guest appearance. ramesh khanna, vijayakumar, fathima babu, jaiganesh, and sathyapriya also play important roles. the film opened in august 1999 to positive reviews and performed well commercially.
the success of the film led to a telugu remake as ninne premistha, starring srikanth, nagarjuna and soundarya, which was a critical and commercial success. it was also remade in kannada as ninne preethisuve, starring ramesh aravind,  shivrajkumar and raasi. the malayalam film pranayamanithooval was partially inspired from this film.


== plot ==
ganesh (parthiban), is the only son of mudaliar-gounder inter-caste parents (jaiganesh and sathyapriya). he loses several prospective brides due to this and spends his time dreaming of marriage. on a bus ride to chengalpattu to take up a promotion as a bank manager, he gets involved in an accident. the scene shifts to three months later when he finally shows up at chengalpattu. nandini (devayani), who lives in the house opposite to his, showers affection on him, gives him coffee, provides him with hot water, etc. ganesh falls in love with nandini, but when he visits her family with his parents to talk about marriage, she rejects him.
nandini reveals the real reason behind her attachment to ganesh. she tells him about her ill-fated love affair with army officer subramani (ajith kumar). subramani and nandini's wedding was planned, and on the day before the wedding, subramani meets with an accident and passes away. coincidentally, this was the same bus accident in which ganesh was also travelling. ganesh lost his vision in the accident, and subramani's eyes have been donated to ganesh, which made her fall in love with his eyes. eager to send him on his way, nandini sends a letter in ganesh's name to ganesh's home, accepting the latest girl whom they picked for him. ganesh returns home to find arrangements for his wedding in full swing. coincidentally, the girl turns out to be subalakshmi (suvalakshmi), someone he had dreamed of marrying during his pre-nandini days. however, ganesh cancels the wedding plans and returns to chengalpet. in the end, it is shown that ganesh and nandini remain good friends without getting married.


== cast ==


== production ==
the film marked the directorial debut of rajakumaran, who had earlier assisted director vikraman.


== soundtrack ==
the film's soundtrack and background score was composed by musician s. a. rajkumar. 


== release ==
the film released on 15 august 1999. the film was described as "a film definitely worth watching" by a critic from indolink.com and cites that "it is bound to touch your heart and make you wonder about the power of love", indian express wrote "the plot is almost always predictable, and at times, even degenerates into blatant stupidity. but the director presents all this with such a straight face, that you find yourself lapping it all up". the film went on to win the tamil nadu state film award for best storywriter for rajakumaran.
the success of the film led to a telugu remake as ninne premistha, starring srikanth, soundarya, and nagarjuna in guest role, which was a critical and commercial success. it was remade in kannada as ninne preethisuve, starring shivrajkumar, raasi, and ramesh aravind. the malayalam film pranayamanithooval was partially inspired from this film.


== references ==


== external links ==
nee varuvai ena at imdb