neninthe (english translation: i am like this) is a 2008 indian telugu-language action drama film written and directed by puri jagannadh.ravi teja plays the lead role while siya gautham is the female lead in her debut.chakri is the music director. though the film became an average at the box-office, it won three nandi awards-ravi teja as best actor, best story by puri jagannadh and best fight sequences by ram-lakshman. the movie is dubbed in hindi as ek aur vinashak (2009)
and in tamil as natchathiram.


== plot ==
ravi (ravi teja) works as an assistant director and narayana (m. s. narayana) as co-director for director idly viswanath (brahmanandam) in the telugu film industry. during the shooting, ravi meets sandhya (siya gautham), a group dancer. sandhya's sister surekha (surekha vani) marries rambabu (krishna bhagavaan), who harasses her only to exploit sandhya. ravi narrates an interesting story to the producer (sayaji shinde), but the latter is not ready to take the risk with a debutant director like ravi.
meanwhile, a rich goon yadu (supreeth), who usurps prime lands, casts his eyes on sandhya, and rambabu tries to make use of this in his favor. at this juncture, ravi narrates the story to hero mallik (subbaraju) who also expresses his doubts regarding its feasibility. when ravi pleads for a chance, he agrees for a trial shoot and they seek the help of sandhya and other friends. popular director v. v. vinayak asks ravi for a heroine. having seen sandhya's performance in the trial shoot, he books her.
when sandhya becomes a heroine, rambabu ignores yadu. mallik, impressed with the trial shoot, convinces the producer. the producer had suffered much loss due to vishwanath's film. the film shooting begins with mallik as hero and sandhya as heroine. at this time, an item dancer mumaith (mumaith khan), who had an affair with mallik, attempts suicide and is raped. this and the paucity of funds puts the project in trouble. yadu comes forward to finance the project. once the shooting is over, ravi finds his name missing in the titles. eventually, he teaches yadu a lesson and replaces the name.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by chakri and released by aditya music.


== awards ==
this film won nandi awards for the following categories:
best leading actor ravi teja
best dialogue writer puri jagannadh
best fight sequences ram-lakshman


== references ==


== external links ==
neninthe at imdb