nenu local (english: i'm local) is a 2017 indian telugu-language romantic action comedy film directed by trinadha rao nakkina and produced by dil raju under his banner, sri venkateswara creations. this film's story, screenplay and dialogues were written by prasanna kumar bezawada. it features nani and keerthy suresh in the lead roles. music was composed by devi sri prasad. the trailer of the film was launched on 14 january 2017 and the film was released on 3 february 2017. it was declared as a blockbuster at the box office. the film was dubbed and released in tamil as naan local and in hindi as super khiladi 4 in 2018.the movie was remade in bengali in 2018 as total dadagiri starring yash dasgupta and in odia as local toka love choka.


== plot ==
college student babu struggles to clear his final exam for completing his engineering degree. however, the exam supervisor helps him to copy and clear his course. after that exam, babu meets keerthy and falls in love with her at first sight. after few encounters with keerthy, babu finally impresses her (after he helps her best friend to marry her boyfriend). just when babu and keerthy are about to meet each other, siddharth verma, a guy who loved keerthy four years ago, enters and claims that he should marry keerthy.
babu gets to know that, four years ago, siddharth vowed to get a job so that keerthy's father marries him to her. coming back to the present, keerthy lands in a dilemma when her father asks her to marry siddharth (as she had promised her father that she would marry the man of his choice). but, keerthy tells babu to convince her father about his love for her so that they can marry each other. days pass. but babu gets no 'special moment' to convince keerthy's father, who despises babu for his carefree attitude (he was also the same person who allowed babu to copy during the exams and never show his face to him again).
however, on the day of keerthy's wedding, the man whose daughter's marriage got abandoned due to babu, comes to the ceremony and asks for keerthy's would-be. keerthy's father calls siddharth whereas keerthy's mother calls babu. even in front of impending death, babu tells the irritated man about his story and also convinces him that his daughter could never be happy after marriage because his daughter's fianc had loved keerthy's best friend. keerthy's father however thinks babu's speech to be just a drama and taunts him. an embittered babu shoots himself with the irritated man's gun to prove that he truly loves keerthy, and gets severely injured. babu is rushed to the hospital and keerthy's father gets convinced about babu's love for his daughter. this proves to be the "special moment" which babu had been waiting for. the film ends with babu and keerthy getting married happily and siddharth verma asking his father to find out if his would-be doesn't have a boyfriend like babu. finally the film ends up babu became a cooperator  with huge majority to his constituency by using the "local" feeling.


== cast ==


== music ==
devi sri prasad scored the soundtrack, which was released on 14 january 2017 on aditya music.


== box office ==
the film grossed 26 crore at the worldwide box office in its opening weekend. by the end of its run, it was declared a blockbuster, becoming nani's biggest solo commercial success to date, beating his previous record set by bhale bhale magadivoy. the movie subsequently became nani's 3rd movie to gross $1 million in the us after eega and bhale bhale magadivoy.


== references ==


== external links ==
nenu local at imdb