nerariyan cbi (transl.cbi to know the truth) is a 2005 indian malayalam-language mystery film directed and produced by k. madhu and written by s. n. swamy. the fourth installment in the franchise of cbi investigative thrillers, mammootty reprised the role of sethurama iyer, a central bureau of investigation officer, with mukesh and jagathy sreekumar reprising their roles as the associate officers chacko and vikram respectively and the background score composed by shyam.like its prequels, oru cbi diary kurippu (1988), jagratha (1989) and sethurama iyer cbi (2004), nerariyan cbi was also set as a murder mystery behind a lady, who found dead at a haunted mansion in suspicious condition.


== plot ==
there was a murder in a house. the victim is mythili. the dead body was seen by lakshmiyamma first. it was seen that mythili and her friends along with anitha came just a day before the murder. and it was also widely said that a room in that bungalow is haunted. sai, anitha's fianc and a young police officer, starts to investigate the case but because of an incident he also starts to believe that the room is haunted. soon the case goes to cbi. it was handled by sethurama iyer. soon he investigates the case and finds out that the room is not haunted and it was a murder, and the murder is done by a lady. and it is none other than lakshmiyamma who saw the dead body first.


== cast ==
mammootty as sethurama iyer, cbi officer
mukesh as chacko, cbi officer
jagathy sreekumar as vikram, cbi officer
thilakan as kapra
mohan jose as velu
jishnu as sai
gopika as anitha
samvrutha sunil as mythili
indrans as devaswam
cochin haneefa as george c. nair aka m c nair
augustine as dysp dhanapalan
p. sreekumar as dr. krishnan nair
m. r. gopakumar as mythili's father
rizabawa as dr. babu
v. k. sreeraman as sankaran
madhu warrier as banjamin c. nair / pradeep c. nair
balachandran chullikkadu
baburaj as poopparathy vasu
meghanathan
anil murali
baiju ezhupunna
kalabhavan haneef
james parackkal
narayanankutty kalabhavan
suja karthika as reshmi
bindu ramakrishnan as lakshmiyamma
bindu panicker as elizabeth c. nair
shobha mohan as mythili's mother
ambika mohan as anitha's kin
suvarna mathew as maya
seema g. nair as thulasi
jijoy rajagopal as richi nedungadan


== production ==
the success of the previous film sethurama iyer cbi prompted the writer s. n. swamy and director k. madhu to join hands again for a one more installment in the series of cbi investigative thrillers. s. n. swamy completed the screenplay in a time spanning one year. as the plot contained some supernatural themes as well, swami had to conduct enough research over it. director k. madhu, who himself produced sethurama iyer cbi, decided to finance nerariyan cbi too under his banner krishna kripa productions. madhu, who has collaborated with s. n. swamy more than 10 films at the time, said, "what thrills us is that teenagers who saw `cbi diary kurippu' are going to see `nerariyan' with their kids."
shyam, who has composed the popular background score for the former films, was again hired for composing the score for the new film, which also lacks songs in its soundtrack. associate director i. sasi and production controller aroma mohan have remained in the crew from the former team. saloo george, who was the associate of first two parts of series' cinematographer vipin das and has done cinematography in sethurama iyer cbi, was signed in to lead the direction of photography in nerariyan cbi as well. principal photography began after a discussion on whole screenplay was conducted, that was usual in former films too. apart from mammootty, mukesh and jagathi sreekumar who comprised team of cbi investigators, nedumudi venu, thilakan, samvrutha sunil, gopika, suja karthika and jishnu were added to the cast to play other prominent roles in the film. during the on-location filming "the trick of keeping the suspense alive till the end of the film" was difficult, according to mukesh.


== reception ==
a critic from sify assessed the film as "good'" and lauded s.n.swamy for "making something spectacular out of ordinary material", the "mood enhancing" background score by shyam, and the "commendable" cinematography of salu george, noting that "the highlight of the film is mammootty as the suave and intelligent sethurama iyer who looks dashing and debonair. another
interesting highlight is the war of words
between iyer and kapra (thilakan), a local
sorcerer which ignites the screen." 
the reviewer, however, criticised k. madhu's "old school of film making" style and "irritating"  frequent in-film ads. the review concludes by saying "on the whole, our two thumbs go up for the
return of sethurama iyer. can't wait for
cbi-5!"
the movie was a boxoffice hit.


== references ==


== external links ==
nerariyan cbi at imdb