night train to paris is a 1964 british-american spy film starring leslie nielsen, aliza gur and dorinda stevens.


== plot ==
former oss officer alan holiday is visited by catherine carrel on new year's eve, carrel says she's a close friend of jules lemoine also a former oss officer who served with holiday during the war.
lemoine wants holiday to go to paris on a secret mission: to deliver a reel of tape, containing defense information, while lemoine keeps a fake reel himself to deceive enemy agents. when lemoine is killed and the fake tape stolen holiday decides to go to paris.
he poses as an assistant to photographer louis vernay, and they take three models along to further the ruse.


== cast ==
leslie nielsen as alan holiday
aliza gur as catherine carrel
dorinda stevens as olive davies
eric pohlmann as krogh
edina ronay as julie
andr maranne as louis vernay
cyril raymond as insp. fleming
hugh latimer as jules lemoine
jack melford as pc inspector
simon oates as saunders
trevor reid as policeman on train
stanley morgan as plainclothesman
jenny white as vernay's model


== reviews ==
a review in the film daily 1964 vol. 125 had this to say "night train to paris is a neat, little suspense film that will be a fine addition to any double bill. its length probably automatically relegates it to second feature".  
howard thompson, in the new york times, disparaged the film: "night train to paris  there's an intriguing title. but, believe us, this thumpingly mediocre little suspense melodrama that drifted into neighborhood theaters yesterday can go back to where it came from. there have been worse plots but few more familiar..." and "...starchy dialogue is neatly matched by robert douglass flat-footed direction". "the most attractive thing about the whole picture is a nifty blonde named dorinda stevens. the woman can act, too, which is more than can be said for most of the others".


== references ==


== external links ==
night train to paris at imdb
night train to paris at allmovie
night train to paris at tcmdb
night train to paris at bfi
review of film at new york times