ninaithen vandhai (english: when i thought of you, you came) is a 1998 indian tamil-language romantic drama film directed by k. selva bharathy and produced by allu aravind. the film features vijay, rambha and devayani in the lead roles while charle, ranjith, senthil, and vinu chakravarthy, amongst others play supporting roles. the film is the tamil remake of the 1996 telugu film pelli sandadi. the music was composed by deva. it released on 10 april 1998 to positive reviews and became a commercial success.


== plot ==
gokula krishnan (vijay) is a music loving man who begins the movie with a dream where he sees his dream girl. the only trademark he remembers from it is a mole which is situated next to her navel (bellybutton). he then becomes determined in looking for his "dream girl" with the help of his uncle (manivannan) and brothers-in-law (charle and halwa vasu). on the other hand, his father (vinu chakravarthy) arranges his marriage to a village girl named savithri (devayani), which gokul (often referred to as "mapillai") objects to, but savithri loves him. gokul later sees his dream girl, swapna (rambha), at a wedding where he spots the mole on her navel. he then sings to her, impressing her, but she leaves abruptly. he later sees her at a music class which he teaches, and from then on, they love each other. gokul tries to stop the marriage with savithri in many failed attempts due to everyone in savithri's family getting the wrong impression. swapna then arrives to savithri's village, and it is revealed that they are sisters. neither of them knew that they love the same man.
gokul tells savithri's father that he does not want the marriage, which swapna overhears. knowing how much her sister loves him, swapna is determined to get gokul to forget her by lying that she has a blood clot in her heart. after much persuasion, gokul agrees to marry savithri. throughout the movie, vignesh (ranjith) is in love with swapna and tries to get her to marry him and if not, he will kill her with him also. when vignesh reveals after almost killing savithri that he loved swapna but she said that she will only marry gokul, savithri lets swapna marry him.


== cast ==


== production ==
a remake of the successful telugu film pelli sandadi (1996), the film marked the debut of sundar c's erstwhile dialogue writer k. selvabharathy. simran was briefly considered for the role after becoming most sought after actress in tamil cinema, yet her unavailability led rambha to grab the role on vijay's recommendation. goundamani was initially expected to portray a key role, but eventually did not feature.


== release ==
the film released on 10 april 1998. the satellite rights of the film were secured by sun tv. the film was given a "u" certificate by the indian censor board.


== reception ==
jeyachandran from indolink.com gave the film 3.5 out of 5, citing that "the story is nothing new, the treatment of the story is commendable, backed by good music, songs and comedy, make this film an entertainer. " and that "the director has tried hard to make a feel good romantic flick and has partially succeeded".the success of the film prompted film-makers to sign on rambha to appear alongside vijay in a couple of his next projects - endrendrum kadhal and minsara kanna.


== soundtrack ==
the film score and the soundtrack were composed by film composer deva was well received by the audience. most of the tunes were borrowed from the original telugu film. the song "vannanilavae vannanilavae" based on carnatic ragam shivaranjani and songs "maligayae maligaiyae", "unai ninaithu naan enai" and "un marbile vizhi moodi" based on ragam hindolam and song "ennavale ennavale" based on ragam shuddha dhanyasi and song "pottu vaithu poomudikkum" based on ragam hamsanandi.


== references ==


== external links ==
ninaithen vandhai at imdb