ninaithale inikkum (english: sweet memories) is a 2009 indian tamil-language drama film directed by g. n. r. kumaravelan. it is a remake of the 2006 malayalam film classmates. prithviraj reprises his role from the original film, the film co-starred shakthi vasudevan, priyamani, karthik kumar and anuja iyer, k. bhagyaraj and manobala. the score was composed by vijay antony.ninaithale inikkum was released on 4 september 2009 and was a commercial success at the box office. the film was produced by gemini film circuit and distributed by sun pictures. this title was taken from a 1979 tamil film.


== plot ==
shiva (prithviraj) is an energetic, enthusiastic college student. being short-tempered, he gets easily provoked by the rich, proud vasu (karthik kumar) and his sneering attitude. from glares and snarls to punches and fights, vasu and shiva do it all, even for unreasonable, petty things. shakthi (shakthi vasudevan) stops their quarrels before they injure each other very badly. as he is friendly, kindhearted, and cool-headed, shakthi tries to bring shiva and vasu together on friendly terms, but in vain. shiva, shakthi, and their faithful friend bala (vishnu priyan) stay together through thick and thin and are always ready to voice out their views on behalf of those who stay in the hostel in the college. shakthis father (bhagyaraj) often visits his son in the hostel and is like a father to all of shakthis friends. meera (priyamani), the daughter of an mla, nurtures a soft corner for shiva. she is brave enough to stand up to him and check him when he throws unnecessary tantrums. shalini (anuja iyer), meeras friend, is a shy, reserved muslim girl from a very strict family background. she is often preoccupied with her own thoughts. karthik (lollu sabha jeeva) is a total showoff who tries to humiliate shiva and shakthi but ends up making a fool of himself.
the movie begins on an aeroplane as shiva (a mature-looking prithviraj, with a french beard and rimless spectacles) heads back to his college to meet his friends. with his eyes sparkling with nostalgic memories, he takes a trip down memory lane, and what he recalls about his college days forms the main part of the story.
at the reunion, the friends are happy to see each other after eight long years. but they all seem to be weighed down by a tragic incident: shakthi's death. shiva remains the most melancholic of them all. all goes well until shiva is found almost strangled to death. everyone suspects vasu, but shakthi's father discovers that the murder was attempted by shalini.
in a flashback, it is revealed that shakthi and shalini were lovers. in an ultimate twist, shalini reveals that shiva, who was running away from the police after breaking into an election booth, killed shakthi with chloroform as the latter suffered from asthma. shalini is upset that shakthi's father prevented her from taking revenge against shiva.
shiva is cured and comes to seek an apology from shakthi's father for accidentally killing shakthi. shakthi's father forgives shiva and asks him to marry meera, who has been waiting for him for over eight years. vasu also comes to seek an apology from shiva for all of his antics in college. shakthi's parents adopt shalini, whose family has died, and decide to take her home. the film ends as shalini says farewell to her friends and to the image of shakthi, who is forever present on the college campus.
the message of the film goes for all of us: "never forget the sweet memories that happened in college."


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack, composed by vijay antony, features seven songs.


== box office ==
the film ran successfully at the box office.


== references ==