nothing but the truth is a 2008 american political drama film written and directed by rod lurie. according to comments made by lurie in the truth hurts, a bonus feature on the dvd release, his inspiration for the screenplay was the case of journalist judith miller, who in july 2005 was jailed for contempt of court for refusing to testify before a federal grand jury investigating a leak naming valerie plame as a covert cia operative, but this was merely a starting point for what is primarily a fictional story. in an april 2009 interview, lurie stressed: "i should say that the film is about neither of these women although certainly their stories as reported in the press went into the creation of their characters and the situation they find themselves in."the film premiered at the toronto international film festival on september 8, 2008. it was scheduled to open in new york city and los angeles on december 19, but because distributor yari film group filed for chapter 11 protection, it was never given a theatrical release.


== plot ==
president lyman (scott williamson) is shot in an assassination attempt. in retaliation, the united states bombs venezuela, the suspected culprit. 
rachel armstrong (kate beckinsale), an ambitious reporter for the washington d.c. paper capital sun-times, is preparing to publish a report that alleges that the lyman administration lied to congress and the american public about venezuela's responsibility for the assassination attempt, and that the administration received a memo from the cia operative investigating the venezuela connection which stated that she found no links between venezuela and the assassination attempt . the report also reveals that the cia operative is erica van doren (vera farmiga), a fellow mother at rachel's son's school. rachel confronts van doren and requests confirmation and erica refuses to cooperate. rachel, who has no doubts about the veracity of the report, publishes her story and it becomes front-page news with the full support of editor bonnie benjamin (angela bassett) and legal counsel avril aaronson (noah wyle).
because revealing a covert operative's identity is a treasonous offence and because the individual who leaked the information to rachel is a potential threat to national security, special federal prosecutor patton dubois (matt dillon) convenes a grand jury and demands to know who her source is, information she refuses to divulge. high-profile attorney albert burnside (alan alda), hired by the newspaper to defend rachel, is certain his personal friendship with judge hall will facilitate matters and is shocked when his client is jailed for contempt of court.
days become weeks, and then months, during the course of which van doren is murdered in a politically motivated attack. yet rachel steadfastly defends the principle of confidentiality, a position that eventually estranges her husband ray (david schwimmer), alienates her young son timmy (preston bailey), and costs her embattled newspaper millions of dollars in fines and legal fees. however, dubois is only interested in armstrong's original source. armstrong pleads to dubois that she could never give up her source as they would have to deal with the consequential ramifications of the death of van doren. burnside even argues her case before the supreme court, but they decide against him 54, citing the overriding concern of national security.
eventually, judge hall decides to release armstrong from jail, as he is convinced she will never divulge her source and, therefore, cannot be pressured through continued incarceration. on the day she is released, dubois has the u.s. marshals arrest her for obstruction of justice and convinces her to take a deal for a shortened sentence rather than go to trial. she agrees to two years in prison, with the possibility of early parole for good behavior. as armstrong is taken to the facility, she reminisces about her time as a volunteer at timmy's school, and when she spoke to van doren's daughter, alison, who revealed to her on a school field trip that her mother worked for the government and recently went to venezuela on "business", thus revealing alison as the original source.


== cast ==
kate beckinsale as rachel armstrong
matt dillon as patton dubois
alan alda as albert burnside
vera farmiga as erica van doren
angela bassett as bonnie benjamin
david schwimmer as ray armstrong
noah wyle as avril aaronson
floyd abrams as judge hall
preston bailey as timmy armstrong
rod lurie as journalist


== production ==
attorney floyd abrams had argued for the new york times and judith miller in the grand jury investigation of her report about valerie plame, and he was hired as a consultant on the film by screenwriter/director rod lurie, who was so impressed with his demeanor he cast abrams as judge hall.


== distribution ==


=== release ===

the film received its world premiere at the toronto international film festival on september 8, 2008, with the cast in attendance. yari film group was to give the film a limited release in the united states (los angeles and new york city) on december 19, 2008, but due to the chapter 11 protection that was filed by the company, nothing but the truth was pulled from its scheduled date and has never been released in theaters.


=== home media ===
sony pictures home entertainment released the film on dvd on april 28, 2009. it is in anamorphic widescreen format with an english audio track and subtitles. bonus features include commentary with screenwriter/director rod lurie and producer marc frydman, the truth hurts: the making of nothing but the truth, and eight deleted scenes.


== reception ==


=== box office ===
the film opened in several international markets despite its distribution struggles in the united states. it made $409,832 at the foreign box office, with the biggest intake from italy, where it made $223,130.


=== critical response ===
although the film never officially opened in theatres, several critics who had seen it in advance screenings nonetheless published their reviews. as of june 2020, the film holds an 82% approval rating on the review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, based on 60 reviews with an average rating of 6.76 out of 10. the site's critical consensus reads, "a well-crafted political thriller, nothing but the truth features a strong cast that helps the real-life drama make an effortless transition to the big screen." on metacritic, the film has a score of 64 out of 100, based on 12 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".manohla dargis of the new york times thought the "confusing film mixes familiar plot points with some grievous nonsense, most of which involves the two women's irritatingly distracting home lives. that's too bad for all sorts of reasons, including this one: when not cooing inanities at pipsqueaks, the actresses are pretty good, both together and individually. there's pleasure in watching them go manolo a manolo against each other, particularly ms. farmiga, who fills out her size 0 with macho swagger. despite a shaky start, ms. beckinsale does eventually look the part of the harassed and haggard heroine, if largely by not wearing any eye makeup."in the los angeles times, sam adams observed the film "isn't ripped from the headlines so much as it's pasted together like a ransom note, using scraps so small their origins are indiscernible. the obvious inspiration for the story of a newspaper reporter who is jailed for refusing to reveal her sources is the valerie plame affair, and for a while the details match up. but from there, lurie spins off into invention like a law & order writer on deadline, scrambling the issues so thoroughly it's no longer clear what, if anything, the movie is meant to address."peter travers of rolling stone rated the film three out of four stars and commented: "lurie is expert at springing surprises and getting the best out of a first-rate cast. beckinsale excels at finding the chinks in rachel's armor. farmiga goes so deep into her character you can feel her nerve endings. and alda is simply superb as a lawyer whose peacock vanity about his designer wardrobe hardly prepares you for his moving argument for principles before the supreme court." he added: "lurie has crafted a different kind of thriller, one with a mind and a heart." in reviewing the dvd release, roger ebert of the chicago sun-times awarded it 3.5 out of four stars and called it "a finely crafted film of people and ideas, of the sort more common before the movie mainstream became a sausage factory. it respects the intelligence of the audience, it contains real drama, it earns its suspense, and it has a point to make."


=== accolades ===


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
nothing but the truth at imdb
official trailer