nunnunarvu  (tamil:  english: telepathy) is a 2016 indian tamil romantic thriller film directed by mathivanan sakthivel. music for the songs in the film is composed by mayu ganeshan with background score done by raj and editing by suresh urs. the film released on 30 september 2016.


== plot ==
a dentist trainee going to australia for his exam. he experiences unexplained feelings. the story centers around the consequences leading as a result of the unexplained feelings.chandru played by mathivanan sakthivel visits sydney for his dental course exam. charu played by indira who is a psychology student does research on telepathy. charu learns the techniques to connect through telepathy, as a part of the technique she tries to connect with chandru who fits with the character profile of a person that she wants to fall in love. during the process of connection through telepathy both chandru and charu feels each other's feeling. charu feels a hit that chandru experiences during a robbery incident. chandru feels a cut to his finger when charu cuts her finger. they see each other's vision and hear each other's hearings.
eventually chandru and charu are able to see each other through a mirror. their relationship starts as a friendship and then love.
chandru's friend vinesh murders a girl which is known only to chandru. vinesh wants to kill chandru. charu's family friend prasath abducts charu out of lust. the climax is about how chandru and charu overcome their problems with vinesh and prasath through telepathy.


== cast ==
the film was predominately filmed in australia. most of the cast in the movie are newcomers and they make their debut in this film.


== production ==
the film is produced by sakthi screens, written and directed by mathivanan sakthivel. the trailer for the movie was released 30 june 2016 by ap international.the film has used a title "nunnunarvu"in tamil which is unusual and not commonly used.


== music ==
the film has five song tracks composed by mayu ganeshan. and lyrics by mathivanan sakthivel. background score is done by raj.the song album was released by ap international on 29 july 2016.


== release ==
the film was released on 30 september 2016 in india. in australia the film was released on 1 october 2016  and 2 october 2016 in united kingdom


== critical reception ==
dinamalar review quoted that the concept of telepathy in "nunnunarvu" movie is new to tamil cinema and that the movie is different and fast-paced. mathivanan sakthivel has perfectly fit the character of chandru in the film. the scenes where the chandru and charu characters connect for the first time through telepathy and scenes where both feel the feelings of each other are interesting scenes in the film. the editing by suresh urs is fault less and the cinematography is good. the villain characters played by dinesh and thiri and the character anitha are good. the melody songs composed by mayu ganehsan are pleasing. the scenes where the charu character is abducted doesn't look new and these type of scenes are common in tamil cinema. in summary the film "nunnunarvu"is new concept to tamil cinema.maalai malar quoted that nunnuarvu's concept of telepathy is excellent. while the director has chosen a story that is suitable for many artists, more attention could have been given to the casting for this film. mathivanan sakthivel has improved his acting from his first film maha maha. while artists doesn't look like professional actors, they have done a good job. mayu ganeshan's songs are ok to hear and background score needs improving."view7media"referred the film as a freshly harmonious film. "nettv4u" mentioned that the concept of the movie was engaging and different. the film did not have unnecessary sequences. the film has couple of flaws but welcomes the movie for its fresh concept. "the times of india - samayam" referred the film as having a fresh concept with mathivanan sakthivel, and indira acting matched the role. "iflicks" mentioned that the story of the film is unique but lacks effective casting.


== awards ==
nunnunarvu won the "award of recognition" from  "the indiefest film awards" in may 2019. the movie was a nominee for "the lift-off sessions"in march 2019 and was officially selected for the "dadasaheb phalke international film festivel" and "mozi motion" in 2019.in 2020, mathivanan sakthivel received the best writer award at the indo-global international film festival and nunnunarvu also received the special jury award at this festival.in 2021, nunnunarvu was officially selected for the mumbai international film awards and mathivanan sakthivel won best screenplay award for nunnunarvu. 


== other-language version ==
nunnunarvu was dubbed as panchathantralu in telugu. the telugu version of the movie was released in december 2018.


== references ==


== external links ==
nunnunarvu at imdb
https://www.facebook.com/nunnunarvu-1131793343500245/
nunnunarvu tamil version official trailer on youtube
nunnunarvu telugu version panchathantralu full movie on youtube