okka kshanam (transl.one second) is a 2017 indian telugu-language science fiction film directed by vi anand and produced by chakri chigurupati under lakshmi narasimha entertainments banner. the film stars allu sirish, surbhi puranik, srinivas avasarala, and seerat kapoor. the film deals with a parallel life concept where the protagonist fights against his own destiny, fate and time. it highly borrows from alfred hitchcock's rear window.the film's cinematography is by shyam k naidu while the score and soundtrack is composed by mani sharma. the film is released worldwide on 28 december 2017 to good reviews from critics and audience. the film was later dubbed and released in hindi as shoorveer 2 in 2019.


== plot ==
the story starts off with a couple in a parking lot and their son, jeeva (allu sirish) , he there finds jyothsna aka jo (surbhi) . quickly they both fall in love and then a few weeks later, jo invites jeeva, to her apartment. she then shows that she enjoys people watching, and two interesting subjects, srinivas (srinivas avasarala) and swathi (seerat kapoor) the young couple constantly feud, and jeeva chooses to follow around srinivas who reveals his love story to jeeva. 
remarkably, the thing happening in jo's life has already happened in swati's life. they visit a scientist (jayaprakash) who says that they have parallel lives, and the final outcome is the same, means that whatever is happening to swati will happen with jo after a year.
when they return to the apartment, they find out that swathi has been murdered, and srinivas is the killer. jeeva (who knows that srinivas loves swati deeply) is not willing to accept the fact and questioned srinivas about. at first, he refused but later revealed that swati committed suicide, as she wasn't able to cope with the grief of accidentally killing five newborn babies. but after knowing that jo does not have the courage to commit suicide, jeeva was certain that swati was murdered as swati and jo are the same.
after a lot of efforts, jeeva came to know that swati was killed by the md of olympus hospital, ts tarun (arun kumar dasari) , as she came to know that the five kids died in the hospital due to the negligence of the management. later that night jo came to know about this from swati's mail. for this reason, tarun tried to kill jo however, jeeva saved her in the nick of time and killed tarun, thereby changing the prediction of the scientist.


== cast ==
allu sirish as jeeva aka jee
surbhi puranik as jyothsna aka jo
seerat kapoor as swathi
srinivas avasarala as srinivas
arun kumar dasari as olympus hospital md ts tarun
jayaprakash as scientist
kasi viswanath as ramakrishna, jeeva's father
rohini as jeeva's mother
praveen as paparao aka puppy, jo's brother-in-law.
snigdha as snigdha, jo's friend.
prabhas sreenu as dasari raghvendra rao, waiter and customer at the bar srinivas used to visit
satya as satyam, a thief
chammak chandra as traffic police officer


== production ==
the film met with trouble for a brief period of time over the allegations that the film borrows the script from a korean film titled parallel life. another producer anil sunkara reportedly had already brought the remake rights of the same film for his next production venture, 2 memiddaram. prior to the release it was assumed that the story line of okka kshanam closely followed the same path, sunkara allegedly filed a complaint against the makers with the film chamber. however once the producer saw the film and understood the same and even wished the team good luck for release on his official twitter page. post release it was cleared that vi anand s story and screenplay was original. the director was also unanimously appreciated for his screenwriting in the film.


== soundtrack ==
music was composed by mani sharma and was released on lahari music.


== references ==


== external links ==
okka kshanam at imdb