okkadunnadu (transl.there is a man) is a 2007 indian telugu-language action thriller film produced by cherry on clap productions banner, who was an executive producer for hit films such as chatrapati and vikramarkudu and film directed by chandra sekhar yeleti. starring gopichand in the lead role, neha jhulka is female lead, and  mahesh manjrekar as the antagonist and music composed by m. m. keeravani. the film was released theatrically on 3 march 2007.


== plot ==
kiran (t. gopichand) arrives in mumbai to sell his guest house through a real estate agent gautami (neha jhulka). when he helps a man in need of the bombay blood group, he is asked for help by sona bhai (mahesh manjrekar), an ailing gangster with the same blood group. when kiran goes to donate blood, sona's nephew (rahul dev) secretly tells him that he would be killed. a sedated kiran falls asleep and as he's taken to the operation theatre, sona's blood pressure increases uncontrollably, making the doctors decide to wait till the next 24 hours. upon waking up, kiran is told by jayadev (nassar) to first donate and then leave the next day, but realizing their true intentions, kiran fights off all the henchmen and escapes, much to the disappointment of sona. kiran is later contacted by sona's nephew who tells him that his heart is needed for a transplantation and not just his blood, and that it's sona bhai who wants it. he also tells him to leave mumbai. 
jayadev visits gautami's office to buy kiran's guest house but is told that it's sold and the seller has gone to hyderabad. upon exiting, jayadev finds kiran in front of him and a chase ensues, resulting in a fight where kiran beats up jayadev's henchmen all by himself. while having the drinks with gautami, kiran explains how he had a luxurious life thanks to his father, an honest private bank owner, who was arrested when the bank had fallen into losses and failed to pay the depositors. the company's auditor told kiran the bank suffered as the other board of directors provided large amounts as loans to vips who later failed to repay, but kiran's father still tried to help by selling most of his property. kiran got his father out on bail and promised to clear the payment issues. for financial help, they met rbi official janakiram who demanded 4 crore rupees as bribe. thus, kiran came to mumbai in order to get payment for the guest house before 6 months. 
back to present, sona's henchmen and kiran engage in a violent fight where kiran gets injected with a sedative that would put him to sleep within 4 minutes. kiran uses improvised weapons and kills everyone within 3 minutes, escapes with gautami and later reveals everything about sona to her. the seth who purchased the guest house tells kiran that he doesn't want it anymore, due to which kiran beats up his men and orders him to pay the amount within the next 30 minutes. kiran and gautami wait for him at the beach, where sona's nephew turns up and reveals that seth won't pay him. realizing seth has left due to the fear of getting killed by sona, kiran asks gautami to arrange for a new buyer. he then meets sona's nephew who reveals sona's a threat to him as long as he's alive, and the only way to kill him now is by killing kiran. a fight ensues, and kiran beats up everyone but spares sona's nephew as he had helped him earlier. kiran then contacts his father and learns that a company named jayadev investments from mumbai is ready to invest 200 crore rupees in their bank. kiran is shocked to realize it was sona who called his father and would pay him in exchange for his heart. kiran asks for some time to think about it.
kiran asks gautami to still look for a buyer for his guest house, and she contacts jayadev who agrees to buy it. he however vandalizes her office and tells her to inform kiran that sona would pay him 200 crore rupees. before she can reach kiran, he goes to meet sona, who purchased the guest house, and threatens to rip his pipes if he doesn't pay him for it. after getting 4 crore rupees, kiran goes to meet janakiram, who's arrived in mumbai, at a hotel where he finds a cd and a player. the footage reveals janakiram had joined hands with jayadev but still got killed. jayadev had promised him 10 crore rupees to not do kiran's job. kiran arrives at sona's place and gets into a fight with his goons. during the fight, sona's nephew secretly tells him the room number where he would find the money. kiran acquires the money and destroys sona's life support carrier. sona's nephew is exposed when the room number written on his hand is seen by sona and jayadev. he then reveals he wanted him to die because he wanted his power, following which he's killed and sona dies. kiran engages in a gunfight and at the end survives an explosion while others die. eventually, jayadev shoots himself and kiran flees with the money.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music composed by m.m. keeravani. music released on vel records company.


== reception ==
the film received the positive response from the critics. idlebrain.com gave a review of rating 3.25/5 terming it a "blood chase". indiaglitz gave a review stating "chandrasekhar yeleti, a champion of gripping screenplay passes yet again with flying colours. the director was able to carry the whole film on action and was able to cater to the masses." oneindia entertainment gave a review stating "the film might run well in b, c centres because of its mass appeal with good action scenes. can be recommended to watch once only if you are interested in action films." sify gave a review stating "technically okkadunnadu is brilliant with gummadi jaya krishna excellent photography, and editing is slick. mm keeravani's music is not great, but he scores in re-recording. in a nutshell, the film is an average flick which caters to urban audiences."


== trivia ==
krishna vamsi choreographed two songs in the film. this is neha jhulka's debut film.


== references ==


== external links ==
okkadunnadu at imdb