on the right track is a 1981 american comedy film that was the first feature film starring gary coleman.  it was directed by lee philips, produced by ronald jacobs, and released to theaters by 20th century fox in the spring of 1981.


== background ==
after the debut of the sitcom diff'rent strokes in november 1978, gary coleman quickly gained popularity.  zephyr productions was created to promote coleman's star potential, and 1981's on the right track was the first movie developed from that initiative.  it was filmed in 1980, primarily in chicago.  new york loves lester was an early working title for the project, when the film was planned to be set in new york city.  the subsequent working title was a guy could get killed out there.


== plot ==
gary coleman stars as a homeless shoeshine boy named lester who is living in a locker at union station, chicago. already a beloved figure among the staff at the station who look after him, and suffering attempts to move him to an orphanage, he finds great popularity after it is revealed that he has an amazing talent for picking winning horses at the racetrack.


== cast ==
gary coleman as lester
maureen stapleton as mary the bag lady
norman fell as the mayor
michael lembeck as frank biscardi
lisa eilbacher as jill klein
bill russell as robert
herb edelman as sam
c. thomas cunliffe as shoe shine concessioner
belinda bremner as lady with suitcase
nathan davis as mario
mike bacarella as sean
jack wasserman as vito
fern persons as flower lady
arthur smith as gerald
mike genovese as louis
harry gorsuch as harry
george brengel as bookstore man
corin rogers as mark
page hannah as sally
i.w. klein as i.r.s. man
muriel bach as beauty salon boss lady
ronda pierson, linda golla and brenda lively as salon girls
john mohrlein as thief
sally benoit as tv interviewer
thom brandolino as tv crewman
jerry mckay as pantyhose peddler
mario tanzi as racetrack window man
rick le fevour as mugger
edna moreno as old lady
bert weineberg as monkey man
james hogan jr. as minister
debbie hall as bride
jami gertz as big girl
steve marmer as customer with a cold
chelcie ross and felix shuman as customers
gil cantanzaro sr. as cab driver
gil cantanzaro jr. as truck driver
james andelin as transit cop i
al nuti as transit cop ii
mark hutter and t.w. miller as policemen
george barrow as bit
david selburg as felix
richard morava as traveler / train passenger (uncredited)


== reception ==
though it received a number of reviews concluding that it was overly sappy or simply capitalizing on coleman's tv following, gene siskel of the chicago tribune, roger ebert of the chicago sun-times, and kevin thomas of the los angeles times gave it somewhat more positive reviews. gary coleman earned a razzie award nomination for worst actor for his performance in the film, but lost to klinton spilsbury for the legend of the lone ranger.
the film was released on vhs in the 1980s, but it has never seen an official release on dvd.  the movie has not received much attention in latter years, though a short article in entertainment weekly in 2004 compared the film to the then newly released tom hanks film the terminal, where hanks' character  lives for months in an airport terminal.


== references ==


== external links ==
on the right track at imdb
on the right track at rotten tomatoes
on the right track at the tcm movie database
on the right track at allmovie