once more is a 1997 indian tamil-language romantic comedy film directed by s. a. chandrasekhar. the film features vijay and sivaji ganesan  as the male leads, while simran and saroja devi play their love interests. the film was remade in telugu as daddy daddy with akkineni nageswara rao, harish, and raasi. 
the movie was a commercial success. it was regarded as one of the landmark films in vijay's career.


== plot ==
vijay (vijay) is a rich young business man, whose only one aim in life is to have fun, is the managing director of a big tea estate in ooty and his company goes on a big loss because of his mismanagement. vijay spends most of his time in partying and flirting with girls whenever he feels like. to manage the loss to his company, vijay invites his father rajashekar (who is in the united states) to come to india to sign some documents. rajashekar dies in a plane crash on his way to india. vijay's maternal uncle (manivannan) comes up with the idea of having another elderly person to act as vijay's father for a while until the documents are signed. so they visit a senior home, where they meet selvam (sivaji ganesan) and they request him to act as vijay's father. he agrees to it and starts to act as vijay's father.
selvam observes the careless, take-it-easy life style of vijay and is reminded of his old days when he used to be like vijay. selvam is very affectionate towards vijay and he considers him as his son. vijay finds out about selvam's past life, that selvam was married to shantha (saroja devi) and they have been living separated for the past 34 years. he wants them to get united and he searches and finds the whereabouts of shantha. meanwhile, kavitha (simran) joins vijay's company and she talks to vijay in her own style. vijay is knocked out by kavitha's beauty and he falls in love with her. then, their love gets into trouble because of kavitha's mother. now, vijay tries to unite selvam and shantha. in return selvam tries to unite vijay and kavitha. kavitha first tries to kill vijay to avenge her sister anju, who committed suicide due to vijay rejecting her love for him. but through vijay's maternal uncle and selvam, she understands vijay's good heart and unites with him. also, selvam and shantha meet once again and get married 'once more'. the film hence ends with a happy note.


== cast ==
sivaji ganesan as selvam
vijay as vijay
simran as kavitha
saroja devi as shantha
manivannan as vijay's maternal uncle
anju aravind as anju
charle
s. s. chandran as shanmugasundaram (ss)
thalapathy dinesh
mohan raman as tension thyagarajan
mannangatti subramaniyam as (shantha bodyguard)
chaplin balu
c. r. saraswathi as (kavitha, anju mother)
s. a. chandrasekhar as vijay's dad rajashekar (voice over)


== production ==
the director, s. a. chandrasekhar, convinced sivaji ganesan to feature in the film after sathya sai baba told him to continue acting for this role. scenes from iruvar ullam (1963) were also featured extensively in the film, being used as flashback scenes depicting the backstory of ganesan and b. saroja devi's characters. saroja devi considered once more to be a sequel to iruvar ullam.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the film was composed by deva, while the lyrics were written by vairamuthu and pazhani bharathi.


== critical reception ==
behindwoods gave the film a positive review and stated that the film was a commercial family entertainer. new straits times wrote that the film was a good family entertainer.


== references ==


== external links ==
once more at imdb