one wild oat is a 1951 british comedy film directed by charles saunders and starring stanley holloway, robertson hare and sam costa with a notable appearance by a pre-stardom audrey hepburn as an extra.


== plot ==
a barrister (robertson hare) attempts to discourage his daughter's infatuation for a philanderer by revealing his past. the plan backfires when the daughter's would-be father-in-law (stanley holloway) threatens to reveal the barrister's shady background.


== cast ==
robertson hare as humphrey proudfoot
stanley holloway as alfred gilbey
sam costa as mr. pepys
andrew crawford as fred gilbey
vera pearce as mrs. gilbey
june sylvaine as cherrie proudfoot
robert moreton as throstle
constance lorne as mrs. proudfoot
gwen cherrell as audrey cuttle #1
irene handl as emily pepys (audrey cuttle #2)
ingeborg von kusserow as gloria samson (as ingeborg wells)
charles groves as charles
joan rice as annie (maid)
audrey hepburn as the hotel receptionist
fred berger as samson
james fox as the porter
roger moore (uncredited) had a bit part


== production ==
it was made at the riverside studios in hammersmith with sets designed by the art director ivan king. the film was adapted by vernon sylvaine from his 1948 play one wild oat. the stage production debuted at the garrick theatre in london and was directed by jack buchanan.
the stage version starred robertson hare, who reprised his role for the film, and arthur riscoe (who replaced alfred drayton following his death in 1949), the part being played by stanley holloway in the screen version.  the stage cast were (in order of appearance): julie mortimer, constance lorne, robertson hare, george bradford/robert moreton, june sylvaine, arthur riscoe, john stone, ruth maitland, tom squire, charles groves, anne stapledon, horace sequeira and helene burls.


== notes ==
in addition to the film featuring early appearances from future stars audrey hepburn and roger moore, the role of cherrie (june sylvaine) was played, in the stage and film version, by the wife of the author (vernon sylvaine).  audrey has a thirty-second scene as a hotel receptionist. interesting to note that thirteen years later, she would be the star and holloway the support in my fair lady.
during the play's west end run, the garrick theatre and two cast members were featured in a humorous cameo scene, reading the stage newspaper (probably looking for new jobs due to london's anticipated destruction), in the 1950 film seven days to noon (see still).

there was a television version of the play shown by the bbc in 1972 starring brian rix.


== external links ==
one wild oat at imdb
one wild oat at rotten tomatoes
seven days to noon at imdb