oosaravelli (english: chameleon) is a 2011 indian telugu-language action thriller film directed by surender reddy. it stars n. t. rama rao jr. and tamannaah in the lead roles and shaam, prakash raj, vidyut jammwal, payal ghosh, murali sharma,  jaya prakash reddy and rahman in supporting roles. the score and soundtrack for the film is composed by devi sri prasad. the film released across 1,800 screens worldwide. it broke previous tollywood records of highest opening day gross by grossing 16.3 crore (us$2.3 million). the film was an average grosser at the box office.the film is remade into bengali in 2013 as rocky, directed by sujit mondal,  starring mahaakshay chakraborty and pooja bose.


== plot ==
tony is a guy that will do anything for money. whilst in kashmir, tony meets a young girl named niharika  who has been kidnapped and held hostage by terrorists along with tony himself.
he escapes with her and subsequently falls in love with her whilst rescuing her but go their own way and tony leaves without telling her about his feelings and without knowing her name
niharika is living with her friend chitra when tony finds her and comes to tell her that he loves her and thought she loved him when they escaped from kashmir.
niharika tells him that she is already engaged to a guy called rakesh and loves him dearly and is soon going to marry him.
rakesh is a smuggler/terrorist and also happens to be the minister's son both of which niharika is unaware of.
tony tell her he will make her love him in 15 days and keeps following niharika and her friend chitra around when see's a local goon eve tease them both. tony mercilessly beats him to near death when niharika stops him and shouts at him for being so ruthless. she tell him she will never ever love him, not in 15 days or even 15 years!!!
rakesh asks tony to meet him but tony call niharika there and tells her to hide and hear their conversation. niharika overhears rakesh saying that if niharika doesn't marry him he will kill her and whoever she does marry. 
niharika finds out that rakesh is a smuggler, a spoilt brat and a terrorist and leaves him.
she also realises that she is now in love with tony and phones to tell him exactly that but she doesn't know that tony is also a goon and will do anything for money.
one day, tony is kidnapped by rakesh and irfan bhai who is the younger brother of a dubai mafia don ajju bhai. he kills irfan, rakesh and his father thus making him a target for ajju bhai's mafia goons and the police.
when tony, niharika, and chitra go to the temple one day to take blessings for their upcoming marriage, chitra sees tony killing the police officer in charge of the case.
tony then tells chitra that he knew niharika long before he rescued her in kashmir. he tells her that his father was a criminal and made him one too but on his deathbed told him to do something good which people will remember long after his death.
tony reveals that niharika's brother was an undercover cop in ajju bhai gang. his handler was the cop he just killed who double crossed niharika's brother and tells ajju bhai everything about his whole family and gets them all killed.
niharika's brother is called a traitor and terrorist in the news. 
the only one who survived was niharika, but she has a bullet lodged in her head and if it's removed she can die and if not removed then she can lose her memory anytime.
tony continues and says that's when he first met niharika who pleaded with him to take everything including her self respect if only tony does this job for her. niharika recognises one person and then loses her memory. 
tony has been killing everyone for niharika but she has lost her memory and can't remember anything. tony tells chitra not to tell niharika anything yet and chitra realising that tony is doing the right thing promises him.
the doctors say that she might or might not get her memory back. 
in the end tony kills all the goons who killed niharika's family and how he kills them makes up the rest of the film.
will niharika and tony finally live peacefully or will they perish in the fight for justice which niharika doesn't even remember she instigated in the first place....


== cast ==


== production ==
the production of the film began on 3 march 2011 at gandipet. the film was shot in hyderabad, switzerland, bangkok, pattaya, italy and france.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the film was released worldwide on 15 september 2011. k. raghavendra rao graced the  audio function and released the cd's as well as the 2 gb microchip sim card. while the first cd was received by m. m. keeravani, the first microchip sim card was received by s. s. rajamouli. other prominent guests in the function were d. suresh babu, boyapati srinu, kodali nani, nallamalapu bujji, vallabhaneni vamsi, b.v.s.n. prasad, dil raju, vamsi paidipally, surender reddy, jr ntr, tamanna, ganesh, k l narayana, devi sri prasad, sirish, lakshman, g.v, gunnam gangaraju, ramajogayya sastry, anantha sreeram, b bapineedu, gautham raju, k s rama rao, k atchi reddy, suresh reddy, koratala siva, rasool yellora, vakkantham vamsi and others. the music was composed by devi sri prasad. the song 'dandiya india' was reused by devi from 'pudikale pudikadhu' song,from tamil movie 'venghai' (2011),starring dhanush, tamanna .
the audio launch program was aired live on maa tv and was held at shilpakala vedika on the same day.
critical reception123telugu.com gave a review stating "oosaravelli is not a typical ntr album. ntr said that he is trying out something new with oosaravelli and it reflects in the audio album. there are some nice melodies and youthful tracks but there are some mass, commercial numbers as well. the audio tries to play to the strengths of ntr and surender reddy. there is ample scope for stylish picturization and room has been left for ntr to showcase his dancing. "niharika niharika", "nenante naaku","dandiya india" & "love ante caring" are my picks. a pretty decent album overall but definitely not dsps best work. success will depend on choreography and picturization." ragalahari.com gave a review stating "overall vision of the songs is good but this album may disappoint the movie lovers a little since they have already listened to better songs in ntr-devisri combination in the past. however, devisri has the ability to instantly capture the listeners attention through these catchy songs oosaravelli, "dandiya india", "niharika", "love ante caring" and "yelango yelango"." milliblog stated the album as a "thoroughly enjoyable soundtrack by devi!" bharatstudent.com gave a review stating "the album has some solid numbers and two or three tracks have the appetite for getting into the chartbuster list. however, this is not an album which will catch you in the first listening. one has to go through the album two to three times to get into its groove. as expected, the focus is more on the beats and the energy levels than the melody. so, the songs would be fit for a season and forgotten later. overall, this can be bought for those selected numbers."


== release ==
the film released in 1800 screens worldwide on 6 october 2011. the nizam area of andhra pradesh saw 200 theatres including 76 theatres in hyderabad screening the film, while in the overseas territory, the release in the usa was 91 theatres.


=== critical reception ===
times of india, which gave a two star, said "screenplay falls short, especially in the second half of the film. ntr steals the show in the first half. in most scenes, he underplays his emotions and manages to evoke some laughs. but towards the end of the movie, his act gets inconsistent and he doesn't emote too well either. tamannah and payal ghosh do justice to their roles. cnn-ibn gave a negative review commenting "oosaravelli fails to live up to the expectations, and one can blame a weak script for this debacle. the movie is a disappointment for ardent ntr fans but for average viewers it is nothing more than a predictable hotchpotch film". rediff gave a two and half stars explaining "oosaravelli is a routine revenge drama. there is some humour woven in, there are some interesting twists and turns and some flashback episodes. even so, the director does not seem to have a proper grip on the story. post-interval the momentum slackens. ntr is different in terms of his styling and acting. on the whole, it seems like watching a new, more restrained ntr. tamannaah turns in a good performance.oneindia.in gave the film an average verdict, saying "oosaravelli promises big but falls very short of expectations. the film is an average entertainer and the one big positive thing in oosaravelli is that the director has tried something new and different. tamanna also gets a good role that has scope for action. she does complete justice to her role. ntr brings in positive energy. the twists are good". b.v.s. prakash of deccan chronicle wrote "a street-smart goon, played by ntr, goes on a killing free terminating ruthless people in an effort to fulfil a promise he made to a hapless girl played by tammanah. instead of making a regular vigilante movie, director surender reddy blends romance with humour to lessen the gory part of this entertainer, but once the secret behind the killings is revealed, the film loses its sheen". ndtv stated "with oosaravelli, director surender reddy has tried something new and different. if you are a hardcore ntr fan, then it is a must-watch otherwise the film is an average entertainer".


== home media ==
gemini tv secured the satellite rights for a sum of  55.0 million. the dvd was released by bhavani videos on 14 january 2012 with a purchase price of $7.99 in ntsc video format and dolby digital 5.1 audio format. the blu-ray was released on 1 february 2012 with a purchase price of $14.99 in ntsc video format and dts hd master, 5.1 surround sound.


== references ==


== external links ==
oosaravelli at imdb