operation bullshine is a 1959 british colour comedy film directed by gilbert gunn and starring donald sinden, barbara murray and carole lesley. the working title of the film was girls in arms that features as a marching song in the film.  gunn had filmed girls at sea the previous year. the new title, based on an american "euphemism" for a very british word with the same meaning (bullshite), comes from the frenzied activity preparing for their brigadier's surprise inspection. the film features 1956 olympic swimmer judy grinham as a physical training instructor.
the film was later also released in the us in 1963 by seven arts productions.


== plot ==
during world war ii, a royal artillery officer is assigned to an anti-aircraft battery that is filled with female soldiers of the auxiliary territorial service. his wife who has enlisted is mistakenly posted to the battery in violation of regulations of husbands and wives serving together in the same formation.  she becomes jealous of what she perceives as his paying too much attention to the other auxiliary territorial service women.
lt brown is encouraged to take time off with his wife. he does not get word to her but through various circumstances is nevertheless tracked down by her on the train home. however gunner white has also tracked him down and arrives at his house. the major arrives for a visit soon after and chaos ensues.
back at camp all areas are tidied in readiness for a visit from the brigadier. the brigadier is impressed but the visit is ruined when they discover mr and mrs brown kissing in the kitchen. however, at the point of reprimand, a siren goes off to alert that a german plane is approaching. they man the anti-aircraft gun and shoot it down. the pilot parachutes down and is pleased to be captured by the all female force.


== cast ==
donald sinden - lieutenant gordon brown
barbara murray - private betty brown
carole lesley - private marge white
ronald shiner - gunner slocum
naunton wayne - major pym
dora bryan - private cox
john cairney - gunner willie ross
fabia drake - junior commander maddox a.t.s.
joan rice - private finch
daniel massey - bombardier peter palmer
peter jones - gunner perkins
barbara hicks - sergeant merrifield
john welsh - brigadier
judy grinham - p.t. instructress
cyril chamberlain - orderly sergeant
ambrosine phillpotts - reporter
naomi chance as subaltern godfrey a.t.s.
marianne stone as sergeant cook
harry landis as gunner wilkinson
julie alexander as a.t.s. girl
dorinda stevens as a.t.s. girl
amanda barrie as a.t.s. girl


== reception ==
operation bullshine was the tenth most popular film at the british box office in 1959.


== references ==


== external links ==
operation bullshine at imdb