ordinary people is a 1980 american family drama film directed by robert redford (in his directorial debut) from a screenplay written by alvin sargent based on the 1976 novel of the same name by judith guest. it stars donald sutherland, mary tyler moore, judd hirsch, and timothy hutton (in his film debut). the film follows the disintegration of an upper-middle class family in lake forest, illinois, following the accidental death of one of their two sons and the attempted suicide of the other.
ordinary people was theatrically released on september 19, 1980 by paramount pictures to critical and commercial success. reviewers praised redford's direction, sargent's screenplay and the performances of the cast, while the film grossed $90 million on a $6.2 million budget. the film was chosen by the national board of review as one of the top 10 films of the year, and garnered six nominations at the 53rd academy awards, winning a leading four; best picture, best director, best adapted screenplay, and best supporting actor (for hutton). in addition, the film also won a leading five awards at the 38th golden globe awards; best motion picture  drama, best director, best actress (for moore), best screenplay, and best supporting actor (for hutton).


== plot ==
the jarretts are an upper-middle-class family in suburban chicago trying to return to normal life after the accidental death of their older teenage son, buck, and the attempted suicide of their younger and surviving son, conrad. conrad, who has recently returned home from a four-month stay in a psychiatric hospital, feels alienated from his friends and family and begins seeing a psychiatrist, dr. berger. berger learns that conrad was involved in the sailing accident that took the life of buck, whom everyone idolized. conrad now deals with post-traumatic stress disorder and survivor's guilt.
conrad's father, calvin, tries to connect with his surviving son and understand his wife. conrad's mother, beth, denies her loss, hoping to maintain her composure and restore her family to what it once was. she appears to have loved her older son more, and because of the suicide attempt, has grown cold toward conrad. she is determined to maintain the appearance of perfection and normalcy. conrad works with dr. berger and learns to try to deal with, rather than control, his emotions. he starts dating a fellow student, jeannine, who helps him to begin to regain a sense of optimism. conrad, however, still struggles to communicate and re-establish a normal relationship with his parents and schoolmates, including stillman, with whom he gets into a fistfight. he cannot seem to allow anyone, especially beth, to get close. beth makes several guarded attempts to appeal to conrad for some semblance of normality, but she ends up being cold towards him.
mother and son often argue while calvin tries to referee, generally taking conrad's side for fear of pushing him over the edge again. things come to a climax near christmas when conrad becomes furious at beth for not wanting to take a photo with him, swearing at her in front of his grandparents. afterwards, beth discovers conrad has been lying about his after-school whereabouts. this leads to a heated argument between conrad and beth in which conrad points out that beth never visited him in the hospital, saying that she "would have come if buck was in the hospital." beth replies, "buck never would have been in the hospital!" it is also revealed that when conrad attempted suicide, beth was more upset about him getting blood on their towels. beth and calvin take a trip to see beth's brother in houston, where calvin confronts beth, calling her out on her attitude.
conrad suffers a setback when he learns that karen, a friend of his from the psychiatric hospital, has committed suicide. a cathartic breakthrough session with dr. berger allows conrad to stop blaming himself for buck's death and accept his mother's frailties. however, when conrad tries to show affection, beth is unresponsive, leading calvin to emotionally confront her one last time. he questions their love and asks whether she is capable of truly loving anyone. stunned, beth leaves for a while and goes back to houston. calvin and conrad are left to come to terms with their new family situation.


== cast ==


== reception ==
ordinary people garnered four oscars for 1980, including the academy award for best picture. the picture, robert redford's debut at directing, won him the academy award for best director. alvin sargent won the academy award for best adapted screenplay. timothy hutton won the academy award for best supporting actor in his first film role (he had previously appeared on television).
the film marked mary tyler moore's career breakout from the personality of her other two famous roles as laura petrie on the dick van dyke show and mary richards on the mary tyler moore show. moore's complex performance as the mother to hutton's character was well-received and obtained a nomination for best actress.  donald sutherland's performance as the father was also well received, and he was nominated for a golden globe award. he was not nominated for an academy award along with his co-stars, however, which entertainment weekly has described as one of the worst acting snubs in the history of the academy awards.judd hirsch's portrayal of dr. berger was a departure from his work on the sitcom taxi, and drew praise from many in the psychiatric community as one of the rare times their profession is shown in a positive light in film. hirsch was also nominated for best supporting actor, losing out to co-star hutton. additionally, ordinary people launched the career of elizabeth mcgovern who played hutton's character's love interest, and who received special permission to film while attending juilliard.
ordinary people received critical acclaim. roger ebert gave it a full four stars and praised how the film's setting "is seen with an understated matter-of-factness. there are no cheap shots against suburban lifestyles or affluence or mannerisms: the problems of the people in this movie aren't caused by their milieu, but grow out of themselves. [...] that's what sets the film apart from the sophisticated suburban soap opera it could easily have become." he later named it the fifth best film of the year 1980; while colleague gene siskel ranked it the second best film of 1980. vincent canby writing for the new york times called it "a moving, intelligent and funny film about disasters that are commonplace to everyone except the people who experience them."  on rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 89%, based on 53 reviews, with an average rating of 7.93/10. the site's critical consensus reads, "though shot through with bitterness and sorrow, robert redford's directorial debut is absorbing and well-acted."the film was a box-office success, grossing $54 million in the united states and canada and approximately $36 million overseas for a worldwide gross of $90 million.
the film's prominent usage of pachelbel's canon, which had been relatively obscure for centuries, helped to usher the piece into mainstream popular culture.


== awards and nominations ==


== see also ==
list of directorial debuts


== references ==


== external links ==
ordinary people at allmovie
ordinary people at box office mojo
ordinary people at imdb
ordinary people at rotten tomatoes
ordinary people at the tcm movie database