orphan is a 2009 psychological horror film directed by jaume collet-serra and written by david leslie johnson from a story by alex mace. the film stars vera farmiga, peter sarsgaard, isabelle fuhrman, c. c. h. pounder and jimmy bennett. the plot centers on a couple who, after the death of their unborn child, adopt a mysterious nine-year-old girl.
the film is an international co-production between the united states, canada, germany and france. it was produced by joel silver and susan downey of dark castle entertainment, and leonardo dicaprio and jennifer davisson killoran of appian way productions. principal photography for the film took place in canada, in the cities of st. thomas, toronto, port hope, and montreal.
orphan was released theatrically in the united states on july 24, 2009, by warner bros. pictures. the film received mixed reviews from critics, who praised its dark humor and scares but criticized its formulaic screenplay. the film grossed $78 million worldwide against a $20 million budget.
a prequel, titled orphan: first kill, is in development.


== plot ==
kate and john coleman's marriage is strained after the stillbirth of their third child jessica, whose loss is particularly hard on kate, a recovering alcoholic. the couple decide to adopt a 9-year-old russian girl, esther, from the local orphanage. while their 5-year-old deaf daughter max embraces esther almost immediately, their 12-year-old son daniel acts cold toward her.
one night, after talking of how things have become since esther came into their lives, john and kate begin to have sex before esther interrupts them. kate becomes suspicious when esther expresses far more knowledge of sex than expected of a child her age, but john theorizes she may have learned this from her previous foster parents. later, esther demonstrates hostile behavior, killing an injured pigeon, an act widely associated with being a precursor to psychopathic behavior in children, and injuring a bullying classmate by pushing her from a climbing frame at the park, furthering kate's suspicions.
sister abigail, the head of the orphanage, visits the household, warning kate and john of other tragic events surrounding esther. later, esther baits abigail by pushing maxine onto the road; she nearly runs over the girl with her car. horrified, abigail rushes to check on max. esther walks up behind abigail and bashes her over the head with a hammer. she is dragged further from the road where she regains consciousness. esther finishes her off with the same hammer and pushes her body into a ditch, hiding the evidence in daniel's treehouse. she catches daniel spying on her, interrogates him, and threatens to kill him if he tells his parents.
as kate becomes further convinced that esther's behavior is sinister, john suggests esther do something nice for kate. esther brings her a bouquet of flowers from jessica's grave, angering kate, who roughly grabs esther's arm in response. later that night, esther purposely breaks her arm and blames kate, leading her to purchase two wine bottles. however, she resists drinking and empties one of the bottles. the next day, esther releases the brake in the car, causing it to roll into oncoming traffic with max inside. when esther points out the wine bottle she found in the kitchen, john and kate's therapist, dr. browning, suggest that kate return to rehab, and john threatens to divorce her if she refuses. kate later discovers that esther came from an estonian mental hospital and the orphanage esther claims she was from has no records of her.
when daniel learns about sister abigail's death from max and searches the treehouse, esther sets it on fire, causing daniel to fall, lose consciousness and be seriously injured. esther attempts to kill him, but is prevented by max. while daniel is in the hospital, esther smothers him. kate, whose suspicions have been confirmed, has had enough and strikes her, but she is physically restrained and sedated. that night, esther attempts to seduce a drunken john, who threatens to send esther back to the orphanage for her behavior.
at the hospital, kate is contacted by dr. vrava of the saarne institute and learns that esther is actually a 33-year-old woman named leena klammer born in estonia in the soviet union. she has hypopituitarism, a rare hormonal disorder that stunted her physical growth and caused proportional dwarfism, and she has spent most of her life posing as a little girl. kate is also told that leena has murdered at least seven people, including the last family that adopted her, after failing to seduce her adoptive father, and that the ribbons esther wears around her wrists and neck have been hiding scars from trying to break out of a straitjacket. meanwhile, leena removes her disguise and stabs john to death, which max witnesses. after kate rushes home, leena grabs a gun and attempts to shoot kate, wounding her arm. max seeks refuge in the greenhouse. leena looks for any family member to shoot, and kate tries to hide on top of the glass. after leena begins to open fire at max, kate starts yelling and exposes her location to leena. leena then tries to shoot her, but kate breaks through the roof and lands on top of her.
kate and max run away as the police arrive, but leena attacks kate near a frozen pond, knocking the gun away from kate and hurling them onto the ice. max tries to shoot leena but shatters the ice, sending leena and kate underwater. kate climbs out, with leena clinging to her legs. leena, in a final desperate attempt, pleads with kate to save her while hiding a knife behind her back. kate screams at leena that she's not her mother and kicks her in the jaw, presumably breaking her neck and killing her. leena sinks into the icy pond as kate and max meet up with the police.
an alternate ending/deleted scene suggests that esther survives the confrontation and introduces herself to the police where she is taken away. however it is unknown where this scene was to take place, it was likely either after the events of the theatrical release, suggesting that esther survived the fight on the ice, or it was to be instead of the chase to the lake entirely, picking up from when kate falls through the glass roof onto her. the former would make the most sense from a continuity standpoint and would be more inline with the how the characters have reacted throughout the film prior and would leave the fates of max and kate unknown, presumed dead.


== cast ==


== production ==
vera farmiga and peter sarsgaard were cast in main roles in late november 2007. principal photography for the film took place in canada, in the cities of st. thomas, toronto, port hope, and montreal.


== release ==
orphan had its world premiere in westwood, los angeles on july 21, 2009. the following day, it screened at the fantasia international film festival in montreal, canada. the film was released theatrically in north america on july 24, 2009. it was then released in the united kingdom on august 7, 2009 by optimum releasing.


=== home media ===
orphan was released on dvd and blu-ray on october 27, 2009 in the united states by warner home video and in the united kingdom on november 27, 2009 by optimum releasing. the dvd includes deleted scenes, and the alternate ending. the opening previews also contain a public service announcement describing the plight of unadopted children in the united states and encouraging domestic adoption.


== reception ==


=== box office ===
the film opened in the 4th spot at the box office, making a total of $12.8 million, behind g-force, harry potter and the half-blood prince, and the ugly truth. the film went on to gross a worldwide total of $78.3 million.


=== critical response ===

on review aggregator rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 56% based on 155 reviews, with an average rating of 5.60/10. the website's critics consensus read, "while it has moments of dark humor and the requisite scares, orphan fails to build on its interesting premise and degenerates into a formulaic, sleazy horror/thriller." on metacritic the film has a weighted average score of 42 out of 100, based on 25 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "b" on an a+ to f scale.roger ebert of the chicago sun-times gave orphan 312 stars out of 4, writing: "you want a good horror film about a child from hell, you got one." mick lasalle of the san francisco chronicle also gave a positive review, commenting: "orphan provides everything you might expect in a psycho-child thriller, but with such excess and exuberance that it still has the power to surprise." todd mccarthy of variety was less impressed, writing: "teasingly enjoyable rubbish through the first hour, orphan becomes genuine trash during its protracted second half."manohla dargis of the new york times wrote: "actors have to eat like the rest of us, if evidently not as much, but you still have to wonder how the independent film mainstays vera farmiga and peter sarsgaard ended up wading through orphan and, for the most part, not laughing." owen gleiberman of entertainment weekly gave the film a d+ score, noting: "orphan isn't scary  it's garish and plodding." keith phipps from the a.v. club wrote: "if director jaume collet-serra set out to make a parody of horror film clichs, he succeeded brilliantly."


=== accolades ===
this film won the international feature length competition golden raven at the 2010 brussels international fantastic film festival.
it was also nominated choice summer movie: drama at the 2009 teen choice awards.


== controversy ==
the film's content, depicting a murderous adoptee, was not well received by adoption groups. the controversy caused filmmakers to change a line in one of their trailers from: "it must be difficult to love an adopted child as much as your own," to "i don't think mommy likes me very much." melissa fay greene of the daily beast commented: "the movie orphan comes directly from this unexamined place in popular culture. esther's shadowy past includes eastern europe; she appears normal and sweet, but quickly turns violent and cruel, especially toward her mother. these are clichs. this is the baggage with which we saddle abandoned, orphaned, or disabled children given a fresh start at family life." there is a pro-adoption service message on the dvd, advising viewers to consider adoption.


== prequel ==

in february 2020, development of a prequel film was announced, titled esther, with william brent bell signed on as director from a script by david coggeshall. the project will be a joint-venture between eone and dark castle entertainment. alex mace, hal sadoff, ethan erwin and james tomlinson will produce the film, with david leslie johnson as an executive producer. production was set to begin summer 2020. in october 2020, julia stiles said she was about to start working on the film. in november, the title was changed to orphan: first kill, with isabelle fuhrman returning to star in the film.


== see also ==
fictional portrayals of psychopaths
the bad seed (2018 film)
list of films featuring the deaf and hard of hearing


== references ==


== external links ==
orphan at imdb
orphan at box office mojo