oru second class yathra (transl.a second class journey) is a 2015 indian malayalam-language comedy thriller drama film, written and directed by jexson antony and rejis antony in their debut film.


== plot ==
police constables balagopal (sreejith ravi) and jolly kurien (joju george) have been at odds for years but are under orders to transfer two prisoners from kannur to trivandrum. they board the parasuram express with the handcuffed inmates. while at the kayamkulam station, prisoner nandu (vineeth sreenivasan) escapes. the two officers get off the train at the next stop with second inmate maran (chemban vinod jose) and frantically searches for nandu. the three unlikely musketeers finds the back-story of nandu. nandu's father, narayanan (nedumudi venu) always have a wrongful intention to his step-sister, lakshmi (nikki galrani). nandu, one day determines to kill his father for the same, but the trap he set accidentally killed his mother.  he was arrested for his mother's murder. one day his father narayanan comes to visit him at jail and reveals his true intentions for his step-sister. nandu determines to escape at any possible opportunities. the three musketeers finds nandu while roughing with narayanan, both with the intention to kill. accidentally jolly kurien kills nandu's father. with knowing narayanan's story, maran devises a plan to not let the issue known to others, to which everyone agrees. narayanan's body is buried in a nearby church cemetery at that night itself. in the end of the day everyone is shown as happy in their karmic lives.


== cast ==
vineeth sreenivasan as nandu
chemban vinod jose as balu
sreejith ravi as balagopal
joju george as jolly kurian
nikki galrani as lakshmi
nedumudi venu as narayanan mesthiri
indrans as govindan
sunil sukhada as balan nambiar
maniyanpilla raju as asi johnson
mammukkoya as alikkoya
pradeep kottayam as joppan
aparna balamurali as amritha unnikrishnan
vanitha krishnachandran as indira, lakshmi and nandu' mother
balu varghese as kumar
dr. shaju sam as man in the train
sasi kalinga as koshi
thomas unniyadan as d.i.g
chali pala as man at funeral
rajasekharan as police trainee
nelson sooranad as cleaner at lorry
koottickal jayachandran as james
saju navodaya as pindam biju
hareesh perumanna
pavithran
arun ghosh as commissioner anil
bilal ibn jamal
sarath chandran as groom
paravai muniyamma as balu's step-mother
veena nair as vanajakumari
arya rohit as young lady in the train
vijayakumari  as old lady in the train
prithviraj sukumaran as narrator (voice only)


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
the film met expectations. the times of india wrote that the film "has a promising premise, but ends up being just half of what it aspires to be."now running said that the film was neither damaging or offensive. most of the film's scenes were shot inside a train and they gave it a road movie feel. the story starts when the train is in northern kerala and ends in southern kerala. the passengers on the train are shown as they affect the story.international business times wrote that the film "fails to come out as a comedy suspense thriller as it was supposed to be". the directors, jexon antony and rejis antony, adopted a flash-back narrative, but "unfortunately the suspense elements went amiss, especially in the second half."  the first portion of the film offered promises which failed during its second half.
indiaglitz noted that the slow story failed to meet the expectations of a thriller film. the first half of the film was alright, but the narrative flagging in the second half. it was felt that directors jexson and rejis anthony did "okay on their first outing and a more polished movie is expected from them in future."  the project's cinematography by vinod illampally was praised. since thrillers require a greater punching up during post-production, "the editing seems a bit lax."  the background score was fine, but in considering gopi sunder's body of work, it could have been better.  they summarized, writing the film has a novel theme, yet the execution could have been better. a bit more taut and crisp, with its first half- like narration in the second half too could have taken the movie far ahead. it is not a bad attempt and is very much a family movie and the subject of rape of a different nature is very relevant. watch it without much expectation and you might be pleasantly surprised"
the hindu felt writer/directors jexson antony and rejis antony tried to strike a proper balance between drama and comedyjuggling between the two modes would not wear down the audience. the hindu felt this became evident in the film's second half, "where a scene of high tension and tragedy in the flashback cuts abruptly to a light-hearted one happening in the present."  it was however, concluded that "barring a few humorous scenes, oru second class yathra does not make for a pleasant trip to the cinema."


== soundtrack ==
music by: gopi sundar, lyrics by: hari narayanan

ambazham thanalitta - vineeth sreenivasan, mridula warrier


== accolades ==
asianet film awardsperformer of the year - vineeth sreenivasan (for various films)
best villain - nedumudi venu (also for rudra simhasanam)kerala state film awardskerala state film award  special mention for joju georgevanitha film awardsbest villain - nedumudi venu (also for rudra simhasanam)


== references ==


== external links ==
oru second class yathra at the internet movie database