outpost: black sun, also known as outpost 2, is a 2012 british horror film directed by steve barker, based on a script written by himself and rae brunton. it is a sequel to barker's 2008 film outpost. the film was later followed by outpost: rise of the spetsnaz, the third entry in the series.


== plot ==
beginning immediately after the events of the first film, nazi-hunter lena (catherine steadman) is on the trail of a notorious war-criminal scientist, klausener, who at the close of world war ii had begun trials of a frightening new technology that can create an immortal army. while interrogating neurath, one of klausener's old nazi colleagues, he dies from a heart attack. she searches his body and finds a map of eastern europe and documents relating to hunt, the man from the first movie who was hired to locate an abandoned ss bunker that was the site of klausener's experiments, indicating that neurath and klausener were the ones who hired hunt. lena's search for hunt, whom she believes can take her to klausener, leads her to a war zone in eastern europe (although the exact location is never mentioned, maps clearly show former yugoslavia). there she runs into an acquaintance, a physicist, wallace (richard coyle). he informs her that hunt and his mercenary bodyguards went to find the bunker and never returned. he encourages her to stop her search because he knows what is coming and she refuses. so, pooling resources, they end up helping a professional military unit they meet take on the advancing army, the product of klausener's experiments, a battalion of zombie nazi storm troopers. their leader, ss brigadefuhrer gotz, also known as the 'breather' and another of klausener's old ss associates, has attached hunt to the large generator that controls the undead soldiers. using hunt, gotz has managed to increase the range of the electro-magnetic field emitted by the generator, enabling  him and his soldiers to travel beyond the bunker and massacre scores of people. lena, wallace, and the unit aim to shut down the source of the evil army and prevent a fourth reich.


== cast ==
catherine steadman as lena
richard coyle as wallace
clive russell as marius
michael byrne as neurath
martin bell as young neurath
johnny meres as ss brigadefhrer gtz
julian wadham as francis hunt


== production ==
original outpost producers kieran parker and arabella croft were joined by matador producer nigel thomas for this sequel.filming took place at the old lockerbie academy (prior to its demolition), kirkcudbright army training area and on the balmaghie estate near castle douglas


== reception ==
critical reception for outpost: black sun has been negative. what culture panned the film overall stating that although it initially held promise, the film "devolves into tedious trotting around dilapidated german villages" and that "even if the direction and performances are generally decent for a film of the type, it plays out like a dull mission from a particularly naff first-person-shooter video game, until an absurd final boss  a super-nazi hooked up to electricity  appears, and makes it even more difficult to take seriously." in contrast, anton bitel of little white lies was positive in his review and praised the film's performances and production values.


== references ==


== external links ==
outpost: black sun at imdb