oxygen is a 2017 indian telugu-language action thriller film produced by s. aishwarya on sri sai raam creations banner, presented by a. m. rathnam and directed by a. m. jyothi krishna. the film stars gopichand, raashi khanna, and anu emmanuel, while jagapathi babu, shaam and abhimanyu singh play supporting roles and music was composed by yuvan shankar raja. formally launched on 17 december 2015, the film was released theatrically on 30 november 2017. it was released in tamil as asuravettai in 2020.


== plot ==
when two mysterious men start killing his family members one by one, raghupati decides to get his daughter shruti married to an nri named krishna prasad, for her safety. contrary to the family's expectations, krishna turns out to be a well-cultured man who respects the traditions. he wins over everyone with his nature, but shruti doesn't want to leave her family after their marriage. raghupati's enemies continue trying to kill his family members, and one such encounter results in a fight at the river bridge. having learnt about the rival veerabhadram who wants raghupati's family dead due to a misunderstanding and thus sent the goons, krishna warns him not to mess with his family again. shruti has a change of heart but pleads krishna to leave behind his business and stay in the village. he readily agrees before the two attackers arrive. shruti's brother mahendra hands over a sword to krishna to kill them. however, krishna kills mahendra and other men with the help of the killers. he also kills shruti's uncle ganapathi and holds her hostage. upon being questioned by her, krishna reveals himself to be an indian army major named sanjeev, and the killers are none other than his colleagues, captain amith and captain satyaveer. when krishna's brother ajay committed suicide due to lung cancer caused by chain-smoking, he decided to investigate the matter with the help of his girlfriend geetha. together, they found out about a heavy dose of drugs mixed in cigarettes manufactured by the tiger brand. sanjeev started a "mission oxygen" and got the brand banned after capturing and killing its owner.
while returning to duty, sanjeev learned someone was trying to find about him and his family and tried to warn geetha. raghupati's brothers, the real owners of the tiger brand and its poisonous formula, killed sanjeev's parents. in order to prevent them from knowing about sanjeev, geetha leaked the gas cylinder and caused an explosion that kills her. the men survived and escaped, while sanjeev was shattered after hearing everything on the phone. his colleagues killed shruti's uncle who came to know sanjeev was inquiring about the attackers. his death terrified shruti's family members who stopped leaving home. sanjeev sent details about the marriage to raghupati via his dead brother's phone, and thus came as krishna prasad to kill his family members responsible. shruti is now convinced and decides to help sanjeev with retrieving the cigarette formula. they manage to retrieve the black money locked in a safe by raghupati's brothers and distribute it to the affected parties. learning from his brother about sanjeev's truth and shruti's kidnapping, raghupati is shocked and admitted to the hospital. a police officer tries to catch sanjeev after the money distribution but in vain. sanjeev and his colleagues break into the factory to retrieve the formula while shruti uploads the link to a live broadcast of the operation. a fight ensues, leaving sanjeev wounded and his colleagues dead. raghupati is then revealed to be the real creator of the cigarette who has the formula hidden in his own mind. through the cctv footage airing live, everyone learns about him. sanjeev urges people to quit smoking for one last time and then proceeds to jump into the fire along with raghupati, killing him and blasting the factory. the public is motivated to give up smoking, while the police close the case and declare sanjeev dead. however, he is revealed to be alive in mumbai after the police officer, who tried to catch him, assures support whenever needed.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music composed by yuvan shankar raja. music released on aditya music company. the audio launch function held on 23 october 2017 at hyderabad.


== critical reception ==
the times of india gave the film a rating of two out of five stars and wrote that "oxygen is a film with a story and cast that had a lot of potential, if only it was made differently. steer clear of this one, unless you have some time to kill". sify wrote that "this gopichand starrer is like watching two films on a single ticket. the entire first half runs on flimsy sequences. while the second half is handled fairly better but by then we lose all interest in the movie. uneven narration is a major issue". the indian express gave the film a rating of two out of five stars and noted that " except for our common sense, this film cant offend any section of the society". deccan chronicle gave the film a rating of two out of five stars and wrote that "jyothi krishna's take on the illegal tobacco trade is fresh, but suffers in the narration. he takes almost the entire first half to establish his point, which could be a tad too late".


== references ==


== external links ==
oxygen at imdb