pappayude swantham appoos (transl.pappa's own appoos) is a 1992 indian malayalam-language film, written and directed by fazil.it stars mammootty and  master badusha  while shobana, suresh gopi and seena dadi also appeared in important supporting roles.the music of the movie was composed by ilaiyaraaja.the movie explores the relationship between a father who is depressed after the death of his wife and his neglected son. badusha won the 1992 kerala state film award for best child artist. the film was the highest grosser of 1992 and played for more than 200 days in  theatre.


== plot ==
balachandran had resorted to his work after being unable to cope up with the death of his wife, bhama. during the process, he unintentionally neglects his only son, appu. when appu returns home from his boarding school during vacation, balachandran promises him  many things, but is unable to fulfill any of them as he is caught up with work. meanwhile, appu befriends his nanny meenakshi, much to the annoyance of balachandran.
meenakshi's half-brother rudran, after realizing that his sister stays with balachandran (who fired him for the murder of a colleague), forcefully takes her home. appu becomes disappointed and turns rebellious, which culminates in balachandran hitting him. he now realises that bhama's death was tough on his son too. he apologises and promises to bring back meenakshi.
at meenakshi's house, her brother objects to balachandran's request of taking her back and he sees the way she is mistreated by her brother, leading to a fight between them, where appu gets caught up. the attempt fails and they retreat to their summer house, deciding to let go of the thoughts of meenakshi. appu now gets to spend more time with his father as he had always hoped, although he misses meenakshi. balachandran notices that appu's nose is lightly bleeding and takes him to his close friend, dr. gopan. gopan find a serious internal haemorrhage in appu's head, the cause of which remains a mystery. he informs that an urgent surgery is their only hope and his professor, a famous neurosurgeon is called from mumbai for the surgery.
the cause of the bleeding puzzles the doctors. balachandran soon recollects the fight and recalls rudran being the one responsible for appu's condition. enraged by the thought, he rushes to seek revenge, but is stopped by gopan by shouting that if he really loves his son, he should stay with him till the operation, take care of him and pray for him. the depth of his neglect of his son, now becomes clear to him. realizing that this was probably the only time left with his son, he takes him out as he had promised, to fulfill appu's wish, on the eve of the scheduled operation. he even prays hoping that god would have pity upon him. their journey takes them to meenakshi's house, who is to be married against her wishes. another fight happens between the two and he manages to free meenakshi from her abusive brother. he takes her with them for one final trip where appu (moderately under sedation) hallucinates of his mother approaching him to take him to the other side. however, when bhama notices balachandran and meenakshi together, she realizes that it is their chance to start a new family and walks away, implying the likelihood of appu's survival.


== cast ==
mammootty as balachandran, appu's father
shobhana as bhama, appu's mother
master badusha as appu
seena dadi as meenakshi
suresh gopi as dr. gopan (extended cameo appearance)
sankaradi
k. p. a. c. sunny
t. p. madhavan
ravindran as rudran, meenakshi's step brother
subair
kaviyoor ponnamma
santhakumari
fahadh faasil
farhaan faasil


== production ==
actor murali was originally scheduled to play dr. gopan, but had to withdraw from the film due to a date clash. he was replaced by suresh gopi. actor fahadh faasil made his debut as a child artist in this movie. he can be seen standing in the group of kids during the party sequence and during the picturization of the song "kaaka poocha kokkara".


== track listing ==
all lyrics are written by bichu thirumala; all music is composed by ilaiyaraaja.


== box office ==
the film was big success at box office. it ran in theaters for more than 200 days


== remake ==
the film was remade in telugu as priyaragalu (1997).


== references ==


== external links ==
pappayude swantham appoos at imdb