paradise is a 1991 drama film written and directed by mary agnes donoghue. the original music score is composed by david newman.
melanie griffith and don johnson (at the time married to each other) play lily and ben reed, a young couple torn apart by a family tragedy. it would take a miracle to rekindle their love and a miracle arrives in the form of a summer guest - willard young (elijah wood).
it is a remake of the french film le grand chemin by jean-loup hubert.


== plot ==
willard young is a 10-year-old boy who is sent by his mother to stay with her best friend lily reed, who lives in the delta shrimp-fishing country in a town called paradise. at that town, willard meets 9-year-old billie pike. despite billie being a troublemaker, she becomes friends with willard. lily and ben also become fond of willard despite the tragedy of their 2-year old sons death. soon, billie teaches willard to face his fears although billie has troubles of her own. when billie finds out her dad is a skater, she goes to a skating area with willard only for her dad to tell her to leave much to billies dismay. later at a party, billie tells willard his father left him and his mother for another woman. upon hearing this, willard becomes so upset that he runs away and goes missing for a while. when ben finds him, he doesnt trust him until he saves him from a bad accident. later in the film, lily blames herself for her sons death but ben reassures her. towards the end of the film, willard has to go home and he sees his mothers new baby. the film ends with lily and ben kissing under their porch. that doesnt mean that they have recovered from the tragedy but it does mean that they have regained their love.


== cast ==
melanie griffith as lily reed
don johnson as ben reed
elijah wood  as willard young
thora birch as billie pike
sheila mccarthy as sally pike
eve gordon as rosemary young
louise latham as catherine reston lee
greg travis as earl mccoy
sarah trigger as darlene
richard k. olsen as minister
rick andosca as ernest parkett
anthony romano as popular boy (clay)
timothy erskine as darlene's boyfriend
chestley price as bus driver
dave hager as bartender
john r. copeman as other fisherman
jeff jeffcoat as eddie (the attendant)
scott hubacek as greyhound bus driver
melanie van betten as marliss
jason robert somrak as neighborhood tough
william thomas crumby as lou
carl mcintyre as willard's father
lucy alpaugh as old lady #1
kay shroka as old lady #2
eric vest as dj
max kleven as stunt coordinator


== reception ==
paradise received mixed to negative reviews from critics, as it holds a 36% rating on rotten tomatoes. audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "a-" on an a+ to f scale.


== references ==


== external links ==
paradise at imdb
paradise at allmovie
paradise at box office mojo
paradise at rotten tomatoes