paramasivan (english: supreme shiva) is a 2006 indian tamil-language action thriller film directed by p. vasu and produced by s. ramesh babu. the film features ajith kumar in the lead role with laila, vivek, prakash raj and jayaram playing other supporting roles. the synopsis is based on 1998 coimbatore bombings. it was released on 14 january 2006 to mixed reviews and was average  at the box office . the film was a remake the hindi-language film kartoos (1999) starring sanjay dutt, jackie shroff and manisha koirala.


== plot ==
subramaniyam siva (ajith kumar) is in jail, awaiting the death sentence for killing corrupt and evil members of the police force who had killed his father si ganapathy (rajesh) and sister. sp of police nethiadi nandakumar (prakash raj) is an honest, fearless and upright police officer who has been given the mission to flush out the terrorist outfit behind the coimbatore blasts. he decides to employ unconventional methods to fulfill his mission and engages siva to assist him, renaming him paramasivan, changing his look (cutting his long hair), and giving him a single-point agenda  trace out and erase the people responsible for the coimbatore blasts. unaware to paramasivan, nandakumar intends on killing him after the mission is completed.
the fly in the ointment is played by cbi officer nair (jayaram),  who is out to trace paramasivan and stop his unlawful activities. his assistant si agniputran (vivek) provides lighter moments. how paramasivan finishes the villains and his job forms the rest of the story. paramasivan comes to know of nandakumar's idea to kill him after the mission during the last few scenes where nair intervenes. eventually, paramasivan is forgiven and starts a new life with his lover malar (laila).


== cast ==


== production ==
after the success of chandramukhi (2005), director p. vasu announced his intentions of directing rajinikanth again but the announcement of rajinikanth's collaboration with shankar in sivaji hindered his hopes. in august 2005, he roped in ajith kumar to play the protagonist in his next film. the project was initially taken up by director bala's production house, b studios, and was titled idi (thunder), with laila selected to play the leading female role. the film was launched on 10 september 2005 by rajinikanth, while the title was changed to paramasivan.following ajith kumar's exit from bala's directorial venture, naan kadavul, this film changed producers the next month with s. ramesh babu agreeing to finance the film. nisha kothari was first requested to appear in an item number in the film but the role was later taken by ragasya. for the film, ajith kumar lost fifteen kilograms to get into shape. k. balachandar's kavithalaya productions took up the distribution of paramasivan for the chengalpet area.


== soundtrack ==
background score and songs composed by vidyasagar


== release ==
the film released on 14 january 2006 on the eve of pongal along with vijay's aadhi and simbu's saravana upon release the film received mixed reviews with the critics praising ajith's performance and storyline but criticized the screenplay and illogical scenes and wrote if the screenplay had been strong the movie would have been much better. the film  was an average grosser at the box office .the satellite rights of the film were sold to jaya tv. it was dubbed into hindi as godfather shiva.


== see also ==

list of action films of the 2000s
list of tamil films of 2006


== references ==


== external links ==
paramasivan at allmovie
paramasivan at imdb