parkland  is a 2013 american historical drama film that recounts the chaotic events that occurred following the 1963 assassination of john f. kennedy. the film was written and directed by peter landesman, and produced by playtone's tom hanks and gary goetzman, bill paxton, and exclusive media's nigel and matt sinclair. the film is based on vincent bugliosi's 2008 book four days in november: the assassination of president john f. kennedy.


== plot ==
parkland weaves together the perspectives of a handful of ordinary individuals suddenly thrust into extraordinary circumstances: the young doctors and nurses at parkland hospital; dallas's chief of the secret service; a bystander who captured what became the most famous home movie in history; the fbi agents who were visited by lee harvey oswald before the shooting; the brother of oswald, left to deal with his shattered family; and jfk's security team, witnesses to both the president's death and vice president lyndon johnson's succession to office.


== cast ==
james badge dale as robert edward lee oswald, jr.
zac efron as dr. charles james "jim" carrico
jackie earle haley as father oscar huber
tom welling as secret service agent roy kellerman
colin hanks as dr. malcolm o. perry
david harbour as james gordon shanklin
marcia gay harden as head nurse doris nelson
ron livingston as james p. hosty
jeremy strong as lee harvey oswald
billy bob thornton as secret service agent forrest sorrels
jacki weaver as marguerite oswald
paul giamatti as abraham zapruder
dana wheeler-nicholson as lillian zapruder
bitsie tulloch as marilyn sitzman
brett stimely as the corpse of president john f. kennedy
kat steffens as first lady jacqueline kennedy
gil bellows as david powers
sean mcgraw as president lyndon b. johnson
rory cochrane as earl rose
mark duplass as kenneth o'donnell
jimmie dale gilmore as reverend saunders
matt barr as paul mikkelson
jonathan breck as winston lawson
gary grubbs as dr. kemp clark
bryan batt as malcolm kilduff
glenn morshower as mike howard
armando gutierrez as officer glen mcbride
austin nichols as secret service agent emory roberts
gary clarke as admiral george burkley


== production ==
production began in january 2013 in austin, texas. writer/director peter landesman has stated that the film does not explore the various conspiracy theories surrounding the kennedy assassination.the major hospital scenes were filmed in a building housed on the campus of austin state hospital in austin, due to the period look and feel of the building.


== release ==
parkland premiered at the 70th venice international film festival, and was also screened at the 2013 toronto international film festival. coinciding with the assassination's 50th anniversary year, the film was released theatrically in the united states on october 4, 2013.


== reception ==
parkland received mixed reviews, holding a 50% rating, based on 123 reviews, on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes; the consensus states: "although its decision to look at john f. kennedy's assassination through uncommon perspectives is refreshing, parkland never achieves the narrative cohesion its subject deserves." on metacritic, the film has a 51/100 rating, signifying "mixed or average reviews".


== home media ==
the film was released on dvd and blu-ray on november 5, 2013.


== historical accuracy ==
historian peter ling awarded parkland four out of five stars for enjoyment and three stars for historical accuracy. reviewing the film, he praised its attempt to "capture the desperate efforts made to save kennedy in the operating room." he told historyextra, "it shows that the head nurse, doris nelson (played by marcia gay harden), had to take a piece of jfk's skull and some brain tissue from mrs kennedy [jackie picked up a piece of her husband's skull at the scene], and that junior doctor, jim carrico (played by zac efron), had to be told to stop the frenetic but fruitless cardiac massage at one o'clock, when the team declared jfk dead."however, he noted the "suspect influences" on abraham zapruder's decision to hand over his film to life magazine. he said, "once copies have been given to the secret service and the fbi, zapruder has to choose from many media outlets who want to buy the film. he chooses life because he says he respects the publication, but the movie seems to hint that any suppression of the film's contents is in line with zapruder's wishes, and not because of suspect influences at life itself, whose managing director [c d jackson] had cia connections."


== see also ==
killing kennedy (2013), a made-for-tv film about the same events, also commemorating the 50th anniversary of the jfk assassination.
bobby (2006), a film detailing events, some fictional, around the rfk assassination, directed by emilio estevez.


== references ==


== external links ==
parkland at imdb
parkland at box office mojo
parkland at rotten tomatoes
parkland at metacritic
parkland on facebook
parkland on twitter
lefowitz, barbara f. (december 2013). "the pink suit". portland monthly p. 43