parvarish (transl.upbringing) is a 1977 hindi-language crime drama film directed by manmohan desai. the film stars amitabh bachchan and vinod khanna as two brothers playing oneupmanship, because one brother believes he is adopted and not the real son. shabana azmi and neetu singh play the love interests. amjad khan and kader khan are the villains. laxmikant pyarelal gave the music to this film and majrooh sultanpuri the lyrics.
parvarish is one of the biggest diwali blockbuster of all time  and the fourth highest-grossing film of the year at the box office; and manmohan desai's one of four hits that year, the others being dharam veer and chacha bhatija with dharmendra and amar akbar anthony, a blockbuster with amitabh bachchan, vinod khanna and rishi kapoor. the film also marked shammi kapoor's full entry into character roles (after his own production manoranjan), which he would lead in for nearly the next two decades.


== plot ==
deputy superintendent of police shamsher singh (shammi kapoor) captures the notorious bandit mangal singh (amjad khan) just as mangal's wife is about to give birth. she dies at childbirth, but not before extracting from the dsp his promise to take care of her son. subsequently, dsp singh raises the boy alongside his own. though dsp singh's own son (by birth) kishen (vinod khanna) has a wicked streak, w mangal's son, amit (amitabh bachchan), is endowed with an honest nature.
released after 14 years in jail, mangal finds out that his son is with his old enemy. he mistakes kishen to be his son and instigates him to fight against shamsher's family. they join the underworld gang and spread havoc. amit becomes an honest police officer and is assigned the task of nabbing the gang. after a misunderstanding, kishen comes to believe he is actually mangal's son and falls under the bandit's influence, though he continues to live in the inspector's home.the remainder of the film deals with how kishen and amit find out the truth about their origins and how they react to the situation.


== cast ==
amitabh bachchan - inspector  amit singh
vinod khanna - kishan singh
shammi kapoor - d.s.p.  shamsher singh
neetu singh - neetu singh
shabana azmi - shabbo singh
kader khan - supremo
amjad khan - mangal singh
tom alter - jackson, supremo's 2nd in command
indrani mukherjee - asha singh (shamsher's wife)
dev kumar - dev
hina kauser - mangal singh's wife
chand usmani - radha (neetu & shabbo's mother)
ram sethi - neetu & shabbo's father
sopariwala - guest of shamshersingh


== crew ==
art direction: babu rao t. poddar
costume design: shalini shah, ram singh
assistant director: denny desai, ketan desai
choreographer: kamal kumar


== music ==
the film had music by laxmikant pyarelal and lyrics by majrooh sultanpuri.


== references ==


== external links ==
parvarish at imdb