pasivadi pranam is a 1987 indian telugu-language film directed by a. kodandarami reddy, starring chiranjeevi, vijayashanti, raghuvaran and sujitha. a remake of the malayalam film poovinnu puthiya poonthennal starring mammootty. the film was produced by chiranjeevi's brother-in-law allu aravind under geetha arts banner.
released on 23 july 1987, the film was a commercial success became the highest-grossing telugu film at the time, collecting over 5 crore. the 2015 hindi film, bajrangi bhaijaan's plot is inspired from pasivadi praanam.


== synopsis ==
the protagonist madhu (chiranjeevi) is presented as a painter who became a drunkard when his wife (sumalatha) died in an accident immediately after their marriage. he leads a careless life until a deaf and dumb child (baby sujitha) enters his life. he names him raja and takes care of him. however, he doesn't stop drinking. 
it is revealed that raja's mother were murdered by venu (raghuvaran) and his assistant and raja was a witness, and they are trying to get rid of him. geeta (vijayashanti) meets them in a shopping center and thinks raja is madhu's son. she fights with them when raja accidentally breaks her just-purchased gift. she later realizes her mistake and comes to madhu's house to apologise. she befriends raja and gradually falls for madhu. later she comes to know that raja is her sister's (rajyalakshmi) son. 
venu and his assistant keep trying to kill raja and they are almost successful when madhu is out drunk one night, but madhu saves him in the last minute. this changes him and he gives up drinking. madhu is accused of murder and kidnapping and is arrested by inspector (prabhakar). geeta and her father show madhu is not the actual killer, but the police can't release him as another case was filed on him. the rest of the story is how the villains are slain and madhu and geetha marry and adopt raja.


== cast ==
chiranjeevi as madhu
vijayashanti as geeta
raghuvaran as chakravarty
babu antony as ranjith
sujitha as raja
kannada prabhakar as inspector
brahmanandam
sumalatha as madhu's wife [special appearance]
rajyalakshmi as raja's mother
allu ramalingaiah
kongara jaggaiah
gummadi venkateswara rao
giribabu
prasad babu
p.j. sarma


== soundtrack ==
all songs were composed by k. chakravarthy with lyrics written by acharya atreya and veturi sundararama murthy. vocals by s. p. balasubrahmanyam, p. susheela & s. janaki.


== reception ==
the film collecting over 5 crore in its theatrical run.this movie was chiranjeevi's first silver-jubilee hit. it had a 175-day run in prathap theatre on 5 daily shows (still record), in tirupathi. in those days,a telugu  movie running in for more than 100 days with daily 4 shows is difficult  due to introducing of slab system by ap govt in 1984. and also this film surpassed another record that a telugu movie has run of 100 days with 5 shows per a day in 3 centres(tirupati,nellore,anathapur). previously another telugu movie ran in 2 centres(tirupati, anathapur). it became the first south indian movie to be dubbed into russian language. it was released in more than 60 theatres in russia. and there also it got tremendous success.after "rajkapoor's movies" and mithun chakraborty's "disco dancer(1982)",it is the next indian film and the first south indian film which was tremendous hit in russia. due to influence of this film, later chiranjeevi and k.viswanath's "swayamkrushi" was also dubbed into russian language.


== references ==


== external links ==
pasivadi pranam at imdb