passenger is a 2009 indian malayalam-language thriller film written and directed by debutant ranjith sankar and starring sreenivasan, dileep, mamta mohandas, jagathy sreekumar and nedumudi venu in major roles. it was a path breaker in malayalam cinema in terms of its story telling and started the malayalam new cinema wave. owing to its critical and commercial success, passenger is being remade into tamil as muriyadi.


== plot ==
passenger is based on two characters, who have never had anything to do with each other, and the impact they cause on each other's lives. the movie shows the events that follow.
sathyanathan (sreenivasan), who works in a private company, is a simple man who lives an orderly and uncomplicated life. he travels from his native town to kochi (where he works) by train. the moment the train crosses the chalakudy bridge he dozes off and wakes up at another station. all this happens with utmost precision, as if programmed by someone. he is someone who fights for social justices for the benefit of everyone and shirks from any publicity gained by it.
nandhan menon (dileep), who is an advocate, stands for truth and justice. he respects the law and always thinks of the welfare of the people around him. his wife anuradha (mamta mohandas) is a bold reporter who works for private news channel right tv.
maranchara is a small coastal village. a private company has been awarded rights to mine nuclear fuel from the coast in maranchara by home minister thomas chacko (jagathy sreekumar). there is a political sex scandal and a legal battle within which minister chacko, nandhan menon, anuradha nandan and thankamma (a local leader) are involved. the plot takes a turn when anuradha obtains a video clip of the minister collaborating with police and corporates. they plan to kill innocent people who are occupying land with potential mineral resources. nandhan is kidnapped by gangsters working for the minister to lure anuradha into returning the video.
by sheer coincidence, sathyanathan gets involved. unlike normal bystanders, he and driver nair (nedumudi venu) decide to join the couple in the fight to save the people of maranchara, nandhan menon and anuradha. they team up and decide to show the video clip to the chairman (madhu) of right tv, where anuradha is working. when it is telecasted via their channel, all the play and decision of minister fails and he is dismissed. nandhan sends an sms to anuradha where he is held hostage. but anuradha has already gone to her office with her co-workers, sent by the chairman. sathyanathan gets the sms sent to anuradha's phone (she forgets the phone in backseat of taxi). as informed by nandhan in sms, driver drops sathyanathan to aluva railway station and without buying any charges, the driver leaves. sathyanathan catches the passenger train and reaches the location, pulls the chain and gets down and seen nandhan and takes him to the hospital. with no other word said or heard, he leaves the hospital. later that night, he reaches home and switches on the tv in which he see the interview with mr. and mrs nandhan menon thanking him, the person unknown to them. the next morning, sathyanathan resumes with his daily life.


== cast ==


=== major characters ===
sreenivasan as sathyanathan
dileep as advocate nandhan menon
mamta mohandas as anuradha nandhan
jagathy sreekumar as home minister thomas chacko
nedumudi venu as driver nair
lakshmi sharma as gayathri
madhu as right tv chairman
harisree ashokan as varghese, sathyanathan's friend
manikuttan as sudheendran
anand swami as anali shaji
sreejith ravi as sunny
anoop chandran as unni, sathyanathan's friend
kochu preman as jaffer, sathyanathan's friend
t. p. madhavan as thankappan, sathyanathan's friend
sona nair as thankamma rajan
manikandan pattambi


=== minor characters ===
sivaji guruvayoor as station master
manikandan pattambi as minister's assistant
anandkumar as alex koshy
valsala menon as sathyanathan's mother
lipoy as d.g.p.
saju. v. j. as circle inspector
jobi moothedathu as sivan
pala aravindan as m.d.
sibi kuruvila as sajan
master vineet vinayaka as sathyanathan's son
nilambur ayisha as nasibu umma
shandy as journalist
revathy as sathyanathan's daughter
krishna praba as receptionist


== awards ==
lohithadas puraskaram for best screenplaythe film won the first lohithadas puraskaram for best screenplay, an award to commemorize screenwriter a.k. lohithadas.

dubai amma awardsbest socially committed movie
best debut director - ranjith sankar
best villain - jagathy sreekumarasianet film awardsbest character actor - sreenivasan
best screenplay - ranjith sankarkerala film critics awardbest popular movie
special jury award for direction - ranjith sankarvanitha nippon awardsbest villain - jagathy sreekumarmathrubhumi amritha awardsmost popular actor - sreenivasanworld malayali council - kairali awardsbest screenplay - ranjith sankarsurya tv awardsbest debut director - ranjith sankar
best villain - jagathy sreekumarv. santharam awardsbest debut director (nomination)filmfare awardsbest director (nomination)
best actress (nomination)jaihind awardsbest villain - jagathy sreekumar

southscope awardsbest director (nomination)
best actress (nomination)


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of passenger, features one song which is the theme song of the movie, is composed by bijibal and sung by vineeth sreenivasan


== box office ==
the film was commercial success.


== references ==


== external links ==
passenger at imdb