pastime is a 1990 american drama film directed by robin b. armstrong and written by david eyre jr. the film stars william russ, glenn plummer, noble willingham, jeffrey tambor, and scott plank. the film was released on august 23, 1991, by miramax films.


== plot ==
in 1957, a california low-level minor-league baseball team called the steamers has a pitcher way beyond his prime, 41-year-old roy dean bream, who reminisces about his brief "cup of coffee" in the major leagues and how the great stan musial once hit a grand slam home run against him.
new to the team is 17-year-old tyron debray, a fireballing pitcher bream immediately takes under his wing. because one is old, talkative and white and the other young, quiet and black, various tensions materialize on the team, many of them instigated by randy keever, a bad-tempered bully who is another of the team's pitchers.
bream is keeping a secret as he goes through what is likely to be his final season, a heart condition for which he is taking medication. his dream is to see young debray succeed and to get one last chance himself before giving up america's "national pastime," baseball, once and for all.


== cast ==
william russ as roy dean bream
glenn plummer as tyrone debray
noble willingham as clyde bigby
jeffrey tambor as peter laporte
scott plank as randy keever
john achorn as cal
ernie banks as steamer fan
ernie lee banks as steamer fan
joey banks as slinding base runner
mark benedetto as beaned bomber
susan cash as mrs. laporte
michael chieffo as pool player
troy evans as art
bob feller as vfw man
charles fick as 1st first base umpire
mary pat gleason as woman at bar
ricky paull goldin as hahn
john homa as frank
kathryn kates as ethel
harmon killebrew as vfw man
john martin as baseball player
peter murnik as simmons
don newcombe as flag raiser
patrick o'bryan as walsh
deirdre o'connell as inez brice
don perry as drunk old-timer
brogan roche as bomber pitcher
reed rudy as spicer
duke snider as steamer fan
craig stark as bomber catcher
charles stransky as elton
charles tyner as arnold
nancy wagner as 1st catty woman at party
sarah zinsser as 2nd catty woman at party


== references ==


== external links ==
pastime at imdb
pastime at rotten tomatoes