pathology  is a 2008 crime-horror film directed by marc schlermann, written by mark neveldine and brian taylor, and starring milo ventimiglia, alyssa milano, and lauren lee smith. the film premiered april 11, 2008 in the united kingdom and opened in limited release in the united states on april 18, 2008.


== plot ==
the intro shows a camera recording faces of corpses, with their mouths being moved by medical students.
med school student teddy grey graduates at the top of his class from harvard and joins one of the nation's most prestigious pathology programs. there, a rivalry develops between a group of interns and teddy. they invite him into their group, which entertains itself with a secret after-hours game at the morgue of who can commit the perfect undetectable murder. eventually the group's leader, jake gallo, realizes that teddy is sleeping with his girlfriend, juliette bath. when teddy catches several members of the group in lies, he realizes that what initially seemed like vigilante killings are, in reality, innocent people murdered for sport.
teddy's fiance gwen arrives to stay with him in his apartment. gallo, angered by juliette's infidelity, kills her for the next game. however, just as they are about to begin the autopsy on juliette (in the meantime plotting teddy's death), gallo realizes that the gas has been left on in the room.  teddy rigged the gas to kill everyone in the group.  this results in a massive explosion as one of the group lights a crystal-meth pipe.  everyone in the room is caught in the explosion.  gallo realizes what is about to happen and survives. teddy is seen walking away from the explosion.
later, gallo manages to kill gwen in what he believes to be the "perfect murder". upon completing his autopsy report on his murdered fiance, teddy is knocked out by gallo and then is forced to trade verbal barbs with him. teddy uses some of gallo's own rhetoric against him in reverse psychology fashion, after which fellow pathologist ben stravinsky frees teddy and together they kill gallo in exactly the same way that he killed teddy's fiance. in the process, they vivisect gallo.


== cast ==
milo ventimiglia as dr. ted grey
michael weston as dr. jake gallo
alyssa milano as gwen williamson
lauren lee smith as dr. juliette bath
johnny whitworth as dr. griffin cavanaugh
john de lancie as dr. quentin morris
mei melanon as dr. catherine ivy
keir o'donnell as dr. ben stravinsky
dan callahan as dr. chip bentwood
larry drake as fat bastard
buddy lewis as harper johnson
alan blumenfeld as mr. williamson
deborah pollack as mrs. williamson
(uncredited) christopher c. hanson as party-goer


== critical reception ==
the film received mixed reviews from critics. as of december 8, 2012, the review aggregator rotten tomatoes reported that 43% of critics gave the film positive reviews, based on 21 reviews. metacritic reported the film had an average score of 55 out of 100, based on 8 reviews.


== production ==
the cast was announced on april 4, 2007 and filming started in may 2007.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack to pathology was released on april 29, 2008.


== references ==


== external links ==
pathology at imdb
pathology at rotten tomatoes
pathology at metacritic
pathology at box office mojo
pathology at allmovie
trailer at bloody-disgusting.com
pathology at movies.about.com