patiala house is a 2011 indian hindi-language sports drama film directed by nikkhil advani and starring rishi kapoor, dimple kapadia, akshay kumar and anushka sharma in the lead roles. it was produced by bhushan kumar, mukesh talreja, krishan kumar and twinkle khanna under the banner of people tree films, credence motion pictures and hari om entertainment. the film released on 11 february 2011. the theatrical trailer of the film was premired with farah khan's tees maar khan on 24 december 2010. akshay kumar plays the role of a fast bowler, loosely based upon monty panesar. the film's idea was conceived by publicity designer rahul nanda, son of writer gulshan nanda.


== plot ==
the story revolves around parghat singh kahlon alias gattu / kaali (akshay kumar), who is living the life his father gurtej singh kahlon (rishi kapoor) chose for him. gattu had been good at cricket and wanted to play for england though gurtej would never let him become a member of the england team. gurtej had threatened him earlier with suicide. his siblings hated him as he was an exemplary child in the house. he was alone without many friends until zeeshan and simran (anushka sharma) came into his life.
in the present day, gattu gets another chance to fulfil his dream and his siblings and simran, convince him to give it a shot. if he gets on the team, they hope, gattu might be able to realise that the world isn't as racist as it used to be. as he gets on the team, they hide the fact that gattu is on the team but gurtej eventually finds out. seeing his son on a team he despises gives him a heart attack and he ends up in the emergency room. gattu plays cricket anyway for his siblings. he is deeply hurt to be disgraced by his father but he also loves cricket and hopes to change his father.
the people of southall all come together and try to convince gurtej that it is okay to be a cricket player for england. he locks himself inside the house where his wife tells him that she has never acted as a mother, only as a wife and often forgot she was both. she turns on the t.v. wanting to see her son fulfil his dream. gattu, who is being interviewed by sanjay manjrekar lies to him that his father is proud of him. gurtej watches with her and realises how badly he had treated his son. the family comes back in the house and gurtej requests for one of them to drive him to the stadium. gattu is playing poorly because he is upset that gurtej disgraced him. only at the last ball of the game, gattu manages to get andrew symonds out for england by using the bowling style of former indian cricketer lala amarnath. gurtej apologises to him and gattu's siblings are now able to follow their dreams.


== cast ==
rishi kapoor as gurtej singh kahlon a.k.a. bauji
kumud mishra as young gurtej singh kahlon, voiced by rishi kapoor
dimple kapadia as mrs. guneet kahlon a.k.a. bebe
akshay kumar as parghat "gattu" singh kahlon a.k.a. kaali, a former fast spinner, loosely based upon monty panesar
anushka sharma as simran chaggal, later simran kaur kahlon, gattu's childhood friend and later partner
soni razdan as dimple bua
neelu kohli as harleen chachi
hard kaur as komal chatwal
tinu anand as mr. bedi, selector #1
nasser hussain as himself, selector #2
andrew symonds as himself
kieron pollard as himself
herschelle gibbs as himself
sanjay manjrekar himself
shaun tait as himself


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
the film met with mixed reviews. at one end of the scale, kunal guha of yahoo! movies and rajeev masand of cnn ibn gave the film 1.5/5 stars, with masand arguing that patiala house was "lacking subtleties and nuances" that could have made it truly heartfelt. similarly, mayank shankar of hindustan times gave the movie 2/5, and sonia chopra of sify awarded the movie 3/5 stars and described it as "predictable". a similar score was awarded by anupama chopra of ndtv who also gave it 3.5/5 stars but the reviewer described it as the "best work director nikhil advani and akshay kumar have done in recent years" and argued that the movie "never soars but it is a notch better than the mediocre fare that we see every week."countering these, more positive reviews came from other sources. aniruddha guha from daily news and analysis and sukanya verma from rediff movies each awarded it 3 stars out of five, with verma acknowledging akshay's role: "patiala house rests on akshay's restraint and valiant performance". smriti sharma of india today gave it 3.5/5 stars, describing it as an emotional journey, and taran adarsh of bollywood hungama awarded the film four stars, concluding that the "hallmark" of the film was the "merging of its engaging drama with cricket" and describing it as a "compelling watch".on the review aggregator website reviewgang, patiala house has received a score of 8.5/10 from 21 users. on imdb.com, the film has also received a mediocre rating average of 5.9/10 from over 1000 users.


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film was composed by shankarehsaanloy. lyrics were penned by anvita dutt guptan.


=== reviews ===
the album received positive reviews upon release. joginder tuteja of bollywood hungama gave the soundtrack 4 out of 5 stars, saying "patiala house delivers more than what one expected from the album.[..]it is obvious that listeners could well be picking up the first popular album of the new decade in the millennium." rediff in a 3.5 star review said: "akshay kumar-anushka sharma starrer patiala house is s-e-l's first release of the year, and it's good news for everyone concerned. you won't feel cheated for having brought an original copy of this cd."


== references ==


== external links ==
patiala house at imdb