pattalam (english: crew) is a tamil language teen film released in 2009. it stars nadhiya who plays the role of a school correspondent and psychiatrist who is very close to 8 school going youngsters who are having a blast enjoying their teenage years without any commitments to burden them. produced by thirupathi brothers company.


== plot ==
the film is about two groups of four adolescents in holy bells school, who are pitted against each other. their encounters make up the first part.
daisy (nadhiya) is the correspondent of the school. a psychologist too, she manages a mental asylum. she believes that students in her school can be disciplined only through love, and no hard punishment will reform them. at first, two groups of students who are rivals are always seen fighting with each other. at an athletic competition, due to their enmity, they come last of all. at this time, a former professor of the school who was dismissed from the school due to his harsh punishments taunts daisy saying that only harsh punishment and scolding can make students disciplined. seeing the taunts that daisy is hearing due to them, the two rivals join together to make daisy and the school proud of them.
on the other hand, sakkarai (arun) is secretly loving sophia (deepthi nambiar), who is new to their school. she stays with him in daisy's asylum. meanwhile, karthi (irfan), who is one of the members of the rival gang, loses his father, due to which his mother deserts him. therefore, he too joins sakkarai and sophia in the asylum. karthi sees his dead sister in sophia, and so he is very friendly with her. thinking that karthi and sophia are loving each other, sakkarai plans to kill karthi. however, after knowing the truth, sakkarai rushes to save karthi, but before that, jerry (yuthan balaji) comes under the bell and dies. the incident makes sakkarai mentally unfit. the film ends with sakkarai hallucinating jerry's presence.


== cast ==
nadhiya as daisy
irfan as karthi
yuthan balaji as jerry
deepthi nambiar as sophia
arun as sakkarai
hariharan as jagan
vikash suresh as nuttu
sathya as guru
guru as jilakhi


== production ==
nadhiya's voice was dubbed by rohini.


== references ==


== external links ==
pattalam at imdb