pehchaan (transl. recognition) is a 1993 indian hindi-language action drama film directed by deepak shivdasani and co-produced by a.k. abdul and jeevat a.t. it stars sunil shetty, saif ali khan, shilpa shirodkar and madhoo in pivotal roles. the film was a disaster at the indian box office.


== plot ==
judge jagdish verma (raza murad) has an accused by the name of yogi shankar (kiran kumar) in his courtroom. judge verma was once yogi's defence lawyer, but now must pass a sentence against him. yogi pleads his innocence, but the judge finds him guilty, and yogi is sentenced to a long term (7 years) in jail. yogi swears to avenge this injustice and humiliation. judge verma's family consists of urmila,his wife (beena banerjee), two sons, kunal and karan (sunil shetty and saif ali khan respectively). yogi serves out his term and is released from jail, seeking revenge against juge verma and his family. he abducts urmila who is pregnant to which her family doesn't know yet. holds her captive for few  months. urmila gives birth to young tina after jagdish rejects her thinking that his wife is pregnant due to yogi. yogi then plans to use tina to destroy the judge and his family. the family is instructed not to contact the police, for the safety of urmila, and to keep this abduction a secret. tina grows up in the company of yogi and his men, without knowing her biological family. tina is then used to ensnare the family into more deceit and entrapment under the direction of yogi, leaving the verma family no choice but to go along with yogi's plan.


== cast ==
sunil shetty... kunal verma
saif ali khan... karan verma
shilpa shirodkar... seema verma (karan's wife)
madhoo... tina verma
kiran kumar... yogi shankar
siddharth ray... robert
raza murad... judge jagdish verma
avtar gill... veeru
beena banerjee... urmilla verma
lalit tiwari


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by anand-milind and written by sameer. the songs were popular during the time the film was released. 


== references ==


== external links ==
pechaan at imdb