perfect stranger is a 2007 american neo-noir psychological thriller film, directed by james foley, and starring halle berry and bruce willis in their first film together since the last boy scout (1991). it was produced by revolution studios for columbia pictures.


== plot ==
under the pen name david shane, reporter rowena price (halle berry) and researcher miles haley (giovanni ribisi) are investigating senator stephen sachs, who has been having secret sexual encounters with his male interns, despite his publicly antigay agenda. however, the story is shut down when the source clams up and rowena's editor, a supporter of the senator, puts a stop to the story. the editor also insists she take a vacation and will not take no for an answer.
while walking home, rowena meets her childhood friend, grace clayton (nicki aycox), who seeks her help in taking down harrison hill (bruce willis), a wealthy advertising executive. grace gives rowena her e-mails as proof of their extramarital affair, which hill recently ended.
a few days later, grace is found dead, drowned and poisoned with belladonna, leading rowena to suspect harrison. grace was revealed to be in her first trimester of pregnancy. with miles' help, rowena goes undercover, under the alias of katherine pogue, as a temporary worker at harrison's advertising company, h2a at 7 world trade center. while setting up gift bags for a victoria's secret collection launch, she meets fellow advertiser gina (clea lewis). gina gives her information about the questionable lifestyles of the senior management of h2a. harrison hill is revealed to be rich because of his wife, mia reinhart-hill (paula miranda). if she divorced him, he would be penniless, revealing the reason why he keeps his affairs with female workers secret. rowena flirts with hill both online and in real life, but is warned to stay away by hill's lesbian pa, josie (daniella van graas). and rowena is not realizing the online hill is actually miles, secretly in love with her. one evening hill catches rowena snooping, thinks she is a corporate spy, and fires her.
at miles's apartment, rowena discovers a shrine to her and explicit pictures of miles and grace. miles arrives home and rowena confronts him. he defends himself by providing evidence that hill had access to belladonna for poisoning. rowena goes to the police, and harrison is arrested for the murder of grace.
after hill's conviction, miles visits rowena. he tells her that he knows she is the real killer and has been using this investigation to frame hill. rowena flashes back to a memory of her father attempting to molest her, and her mother subsequently bludgeoning him to death with a fireplace poker. a younger grace watches from her window as they bury the body. grace has been blackmailing rowena with this knowledge ever since. miles describes in detail how rowena had plotted the murder to end grace's blackmail and pinned the murder on hill. miles asks how she intends to keep him quiet, implying she might sleep with him, since he has long lusted after her. however, rowena stabs him to death and ransacks the kitchen. she then calls the police, claiming to have been attacked by miles and that he might have been the real murderer. the film ends with a man looking out of a neighboring window, presumably having witnessed what really happened.


== cast ==
halle berry as rowena price
bruce willis as harrison hill
giovanni ribisi as miles haley
florencia lozano as lieutenant karen tejada
jason antoon as bill patel
patti d'arbanville as esmeralda
jane bradbury as toni
jared burke as keneth phelps
gary dourdan as cameron
clea lewis as gina
daniella van graas as josie
tamara feldman as bethany
deirdre lorenz as veronica
nicki aycox as grace clayton
paula miranda as mia hill
lauren potter as client #1
emma heming as donna
gerry becker as jon kirshenbaum


== production ==
some of the scenes were filmed in the lobby of the new 7 world trade center, before its opening on may 23, 2006.


== reception ==
perfect stranger holds an approval rating of 10% on rotten tomatoes based on 142 reviews, with an average rating of 3.5/10. the site's critics' consensus reads: "despite the presence of halle berry and bruce willis, perfect stranger is too convoluted to work, and features a twist ending that's irritating and superfluous. it's a techno-thriller without thrills." on metacritic, the film holds an aggregated score of 31 out of 100 based on 31 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "c+" on an a+ to f scale.peter travers of rolling stone said, "foley fights a losing battle with perfect stranger, a dull, dumb and unforgivably dated thriller, free of thrills and any kind of perfection, save a genius for product placement" ... "it's a techno thriller that treats the already clich topic of web abuse with an idiotic sense of discovery."


== home media ==
perfect stranger was released on august 21, 2007 on dvd and blu-ray.the film was reissued on blu-ray on april 4, 2017 by mill creek entertainment. it is included as a 3-pack with straightheads (2007) and wind chill (2007), the latter two making their us blu-ray debut.


== promotion ==
the characters of grace, josie, and mrs. hill all have blogs dating back to september or october 2006 with youtube videos of the respective actresses, in character, speaking the text of the entry with minor changes. this was a relatively new form of viral marketing similar to an alternate reality game.


== references ==


== external links ==
perfect stranger at imdb
perfect stranger at allmovie
perfect stranger at rotten tomatoes
perfect stranger at metacritic
perfect stranger at box office mojo
interviews halle berry about the film at hiphopdx.com