periyanna is a 1999 indian tamil-language action drama film directed by s. a. chandrasekhar featuring suriya, meena and manasa in the lead roles and vijayakanth in an extended cameo role. the soundtrack for this film was composed by debutant music director bharani. the film was dubbed and released in telugu as brahmanna.


== plot ==
suriya (suriya), the main character, kills the villains who murder his family and had been sent to jail. during his time in jail, a well-respected minister celebrates his daughter's birthday in prison. his daughter is impressed by suriya's talent in violin percussion and convinces her father to grant her special permission to learn music from him. during this time, they fall in love with each other, and opposition grows from the girl's parents and the police department. then, they elope. they come to a remote town where they witness the murder of a collector in the railway station during broad daylight, but no one seems to care. they then see that the man who murdered the collector is the chief of the village, periyanna (vijayakanth), so they try to oppose him. in their time at the village, they learn about his past and change their mind about him. he promises them to get them married. the movie then moves towards the climax as whether the village chief will be successful in getting those two lovers married or the girl's father will be successful in separating them by using the legal system against them.


== cast ==


== production ==
s. a. chandrasekhar had initially planned to make the film with vijayakanth and vijay in the lead roles, but the project failed to materialise. the film re-emerged in 1998 with vijay's busy schedules prompting chandrasekhar to select suriya to appear in a lead role alongside vijayakanth. meena was selected to play a leading role in the film. chandrasekhar initially picked a model from mumbai called tanuja to be paired opposite suriya, but later changed his mind. the role was handed to manasa, sister of actress easwari rao, with the director changing her stage name to manasa from ganga as she was known in kaakai chiraginile. vijayakanth's long-time assistant, s. k. subbiah, produced the film, with vijayakanth keen to work on the venture in order to help benefit subbiah.the film was launched in late 1998 with vijayakanth, suriya, director s. a. chandrasekhar and veteran producers a. l. azhagappan and ibrahim rowther in attendance. the film was predominantly shot at chennai film city.


== soundtrack ==
bharani who earlier wrote lyrics for vijay's debut film naalaya theerpu (1992) was selected to compose the music thus making his debut. the soundtrack contains 7 songs and lyrics for the songs were written by bharani, vasan, arivumathi and pulamaipithan. actor vijay had sung three songs for suriya in this film with "naam dum adikkira" song was well received while another song "nilave nilave" was also successful.


== release ==
the film received positive reviews from critics and was declared as hit at the box office.


== references ==


== external links ==
periyanna at imdb