perumazhakkalam (english: the season of heavy rains) is a 2004 malayalam language drama film directed by kamal. it stars meera jasmine, kavya madhavan, dileep, vineeth and biju menon in prominent roles.
in 2004  the film won five kerala state film awards  and the national film award for best film on other social issues. the movie was officially adapted in hindi in 2006 as dor by nagesh kukunoor.


== plot ==
akbar (dileep) is happily married to raziya (meera jasmine). akbar goes to the persian gulf for employment. there he befriends raghu rama iyer (vineeth) and john kuruvilla (biju menon). the three become good friends. akbar loans some money to another indian named haneefa working with them. haneefa absconds with the money and all efforts to get back the money goes in vain. during a fight with haneefa, akbar hits him but misses and accidentally kills raghu. he is now facing the death penalty. the only way for him to escape the penalty is to obtain a letter from raghu's wife ganga (kavya madhavan) that she pardons him.
raziya and her father abdu (mamukkoya) travel to palakkad to meet ganga to plead for mercy and obtain such a letter from her. they stay in abdu's old friend kunjikannan's (mala aravindan) house. ganga's in-laws refuse to let her meet ganga but raziya persists. she finally meets ganga when she is visiting the temple, but ganga is confused and leaves the scene. raziya is finally thrown out from the community compound by raghu's relatives. ganga finally realizes that she must pardon akbar, but raziya has left for her home by then. realizing that pardoning akbar could lead to ostracisation by her community, ganga braves the situation and meets raziya and signs the letter of pardon. when she returns home, she is thrown out of her home by her in laws and the community.
akbar returns after serving a seven years sentence and the family go to meet ganga where the children of the families bond with each other oblivious to the relationship between their parents.


== cast ==
meera jasmine as raziya
kavya madhavan as ganga
dileep as akbar, raziya's husband
vineeth as raghu rama iyer, ganga's husband
biju menon as john kuruvila
mamukkoya	as abdu
sadiq as najeeb
salim kumar as aamu elappa
kalasala babu as krishna iyer
yadu krishnan	as sethu
mala aravindan as kunjikkannan
babu namboothiri as mani swamy
shivaji as vishnu (voice by suresh krishna)
valsala menon as paatty
ramya nambeeshan as neelima (voice by nithuna nevil dinesh)
ramu as m. l. a.
vijeesh as tv anchor
bindu ramakrishnan


== awards ==
national film awardnational film award for best film on other social issueskerala state film awardbest actress: kavya madhavan
best story : t. a. razzaq
kerala state film award for best music director: m. jayachandran
kerala state film award for best sound recordist : n. harikumar
special mention : mamukkoyafilmfare awards southfilmfare award for best music director  malayalam : m. jayachandranasianet film awardsbest director : kamal
best actress  : meera jasmine
best screenplay : t a razak
best music director : m jayachandran
best male playback singer : m jayachandran
special jury award : kavya madhavanit was screened at the competition section of international film festival of kerala.


== track list ==
all songs were composed by m. jayachandran. and lyrics are penned by kaithapram and rafeeque ahammed.


== references ==


== external links ==
perumazhakkalam at imdb