phool aur patthar (transl.flower and rock) is a 1966 indian film, directed and produced by o. p. ralhan and written by ralhan with akhtar ul iman and ahsan rizvi. the film made dharmendra a star in bollywood. it starred meena kumari along with dharmendra, who played a villainous character (or patthar, literally a stone) whose inner good being (or phool, literally a flower) is drawn out by meena kumari. the movie also starred shashikala, lalita pawar, madan puri and iftekhar.
this was the movie which went on to become a golden jubilee hit catapulting dharmendra to stardom. the movie was the highest grossing for the year 1966. due to his rugged physique, he was also acknowledged as the he-man of the indian film industry. in fact, a scene in the movie where he takes off his shirt to cover the ailing meena kumari was one of the highlights of the movie. his performance in the movie ensured him a nomination in the best actor category in the filmfare awards for that year. however, it was won by dev anand for his performance in guide. he made his presence strongly felt despite the fact that he did not lip sync for any songs in the film. in the 1960s, it was very unusual for the leading man not to sing any songs in a movie.
the film was also instrumental in making dharmendra-meena kumari a popular couple and they went on to act in more movies such as chandan ka palna, majhli didi and baharon ki manzil after this.
before shooting for the film, o. p. ralhan had wanted sunil dutt to don the leading role, but it did not work out.
during shooting, at one point of time, dharmendra had a show-down with the film's director o. p. ralhan, since he felt that the director had an arrogant attitude and he contemplated quitting the film mid-way. however, sense prevailed and he resumed shooting.
the film was remade in tamil as oli vilakku, with m. g. ramachandran, in telugu as nindu manasulu with n. t. ramarao and in malayalam as puthiya velicham, with jayan.


== plot ==
circumstances have made shaka a career criminal. when plague empties a town of its inhabitants, he takes the opportunity to burgle a house. he finds nothing except shanti, a widowed daughter-in-law who has been left to die by her cruel relatives. shaka nurses her back to health. when her relatives return, they are not pleased to find her alive and even less pleased to discover that someone has tried to rob them. shanti gets the blame and a beating. shaka saves her from worse, at the hands of brother-in-law, and the pair flee. they set up home in shaka's house, much to the displeasure of the respectable neighbours, who are all too ready to think the worst. shanti's relatives are dismayed when a lawyer arrives to announce that shanti has been left a legacy. they hatch a plot to get her back. meanwhile, shaka's rehabilitation is proceeding - much to the chagrin of his former criminal associates. fire and redemption for some, death and handcuffs for others is what fate has in store.


== cast ==
meena kumari as shanti devi
dharmendra as shakti singh / shaaka
shashikala as rita
lalita pawar as mrs. jeevan ram
sunder as dr. alopinath - vaidraj
jeevan as jeevan ram
ram mohan	as kalicharan (as rammohan)
manmohan krishna as police inspector
madan puri as john - boss (as madanpuri)
tun tun as mrs. alopinath (guddki) (as tuntun)
leela chitnis as blind beggar
iftekhar as babu (as iftikhar)
d.k. sapru as judge (as sapru)
braham bharadwaj as public prosecutor (as braham bharadwaj)
baby farida as jumni
master aziz as bablu
ram avtar as fat pickpocket
bhairon as daboo - the dog (as famous dog bhairon)
o. p. ralhan as sadakram
indira billi as


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by ravi and lyrics by shakeel badayuni.


== awards ==
filmfare awardsbest art director - color - shanti dass (won)
best editor - vasant borkar (won)
best actor - dharmendra (nominated)
best actress - meena kumari (nominated)
best supporting actress - shashikala (nominated)


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
phool aur patthar at imdb