phool aur angaar (transl. flowers and coals) is a 1993 indian hindi-language action revenge drama film, starring mithun chakraborty, shantipriya, paresh rawal, gulshan grover,and prem chopra.


== plot ==
vijay saxena lives a middle-class lifestyle along with his college-going sister, sweety, in a small town in india. he gets a job as a professor at the city college, where he meets with sweety's friend, sudha verma, and both fall in love with each other. when a student, adhikari, attempts to molest sudha, vijay comes to her rescue, only to subsequently apologize to adhikari when sudha retracts her testimony and ends up blaming vijay for molesting her. later vijay finds out that adhikari and some goons had threatened to harm sudha's younger sister, and the duo resume their romance. with the help of inspector arjun singh, vijay is able to get kalicharan, the son of gangster don, natwarlal, arrested and held in a cell, much to the chagrin of natwarlal. arjun gets killed, sweety witnesses his death, and takes inspector arvind phadke to the murder scene, but arjun's body is missing. subsequently, sweety is molested and killed. inspector arvind phadke arrests vijay for molesting his sister. during the trial amidst vijay's pleas that he is not guilty of this heinous crime.


== cast ==
mithun chakraborty as prof. vijay omkarnath saxena
shantipriya as sudha c. verma
prem chopra as natwarlal
mohnish bahl as insp. arjun singh
gulshan grover as police commissioner
raza murad as principal verma of city college
arjun as kalicharan
asrani as khairatilal
laxmikant berde as advocate ramlakhan tripathi
arun bali as justice chaudhary
ajinkya deo as adhikari
bob christo as mr.richard (foreign drug mafia)
dinesh hingoo as hindi prof. at city college
aruna irani as mrs. verma
goga kapoor as chairman of city college
shashi kiran as sadanand
nimai bali as vishal
raj kishore as prof. of city college
rajesh puri as student at city college
paresh rawal as prof. and principal r. kothari of city college
sanam as sweety o. saxena
mahavir shah as insp. arvind phadke
syed badr-ul hasan khan bahadur as college student
gurbachan singh as gurbachan
bhushan tiwari as chirajilal verma


== soundtrack ==


== external links ==
phool aur angaar at imdb