piccadilly is a 1929 british silent drama film directed by e.a. dupont, written by arnold bennett and starring gilda gray, anna may wong, and jameson thomas. the film was filmed on location in london, produced by british international pictures.
this film initially was released as a silent in february 1929; however, with the advent of sound sweeping through the film industry at the time, the studio re-released the film later the same year in june for cinemas wired for sound. this version included a music score and sound effects by harry gordon, along with a five-minute sound prologue with jameson thomas who plays valentine wilmot in the film and john longden as the man from china, which was filmed after the main filming was completed. the part-sound version initially was shown in the u.s.in 2004, the film was re-released by milestone films after an extensive restoration, with music scored by neil brand, replacing the original music-and-sound effects soundtrack. it appeared in 2004 at film festivals nationwide, and in 2005, it was released on dvd.


== plot ==
valentine wilmot's piccadilly circus, a nightclub and restaurant in london, is a great success due to his star attraction: dancing partners mabel (gilda gray) and vic (cyril ritchard). one night, a dissatisfied diner (charles laughton) disrupts mabel's solo with his loud complaints about a dirty plate. when wilmot investigates, he finds shosho (anna may wong) distracting the other dishwashers with her dancing. he fires her on the spot.
after the performance, vic tries to persuade mabel to become his partner personally as well as professionally and to go to hollywood with him. she coldly rebuffs him because she is romantically involved with wilmot. that night, wilmot summons vic to his office, and before wilmot can fire him, vic quits.
this decision turns out to be disastrous for the nightclub. the customers had come to see vic, not mabel. business drops off dramatically. in desperation, wilmot hires shosho to perform a chinese dance. she insists that her boyfriend jim play the accompanying music. shosho is an instant sensation, earning a standing ovation after her first performance.
both mabel and jim become jealous of the evident attraction between shosho and wilmot. mabel breaks off her relationship with wilmot.
one night, shosho invites wilmot to be the first to see her new rooms. mabel has followed the couple and waits outside. after wilmot leaves, she persuades jim to let her in. she pleads with her romantic rival to give wilmot up, saying he is too old for her, but shosho replies that it is mabel who is too old and that she will keep him. when mabel reaches into her purse for a handkerchief, shosho sees a pistol inside and grabs a dagger used as a wall decoration. frightened, mabel picks up the gun, then faints.
the next day, the newspapers report that shosho has been murdered. wilmot is charged with the crime. during the ensuing trial, he admits that the pistol is his, but refuses to divulge what happened that night. jim testifies that wilmot was shosho's only visitor. mabel insists on telling her story. however, she can recall nothing after fainting until she found herself running in the streets. realizing that either mabel or jim must be lying, the judge summons jim. by then, however, jim has shot himself at shosho's mausoleum. as he lies dying, he confesses that he killed shosho.


== cast ==
gilda gray as mabel greenfield
anna may wong as shosho
jameson thomas as valentine wilmot
charles laughton as a nightclub diner
ray milland as extra in nightclub scene
cyril ritchard as victor smiles (as cyrill ritchard)
king hou chang as jim (as king ho chang)
hannah jones as bessie, shosho's friend and dishwashing supervisor
john longden as the man from china (uncredited, appears in the sound prologue)


== references ==


== external links ==
piccadilly at imdb
piccadilly at allmovie
sweet, matthew (6 february 2008). "snakes, slaves and seduction". the guardian. london. retrieved 9 february 2008.