shatranj ke khilari, also subtitled and later internationally released with the translated title the chess players, is a 1977 indian film written and directed by satyajit ray, based on munshi premchand's short story of the same name. amjad khan plays the role of nawab wajid ali shah, king of awadh, and richard attenborough enacts the role of general james outram. the main cast includes actors sanjeev kumar and saeed jaffrey as the chess players. it also has shabana azmi, farooque shaikh, farida jalal, david abraham, and tom alter. it has amitabh bachchan as the narrator. this is the only full length hindi feature film of filmmaker satyajit ray. he  later made a short hindi film for tv named 'sadgati'- another adaptation of premchand's short story.


== summary ==
the film is set in 1856 on the eve of the indian rebellion of 1857. the british are about to annex the indian state of awadh (also spelled oudh). the daily life of two wealthy men who are devoted to chess is presented against the background of scheming officials of the british east india company, the history of its relations with the indian ruler of awadh, and the ruler's devotion both to his religious practice and the pursuit of pleasure.
the chess players employed stars of the bombay cinema (amjad khan, shabana azmi and amitabh bachchan as a narrator) together with british actors (such as richard attenborough).
it was india's entry for the best foreign language film at the 51st academy awards, but did not receive a nomination.


== plot ==
the film shows in parallel the historical drama of the indian princely state of awadh (whose capital is lucknow) and its nawab, wajid ali shah who is overthrown by the british, alongside the story of two noblemen who are obsessed with shatranj, an ancient form of chess.
amjad khan plays the ruling nawab wajid ali shah. he is a languid artist and poet, no longer in command of events and unable to effectively oppose the british demand for his throne. parallel to this wider drama is the personal (and humorous) tale of two rich, indolent noblemen of this kingdom, mirza sajjad ali and mir roshan ali. inseparable friends, the two nobles are passionately obsessed with the game of shatranj (chess). both effectively neglect their wives and fail to fight the takeover of their kingdom by the east india company. instead, they escape their harangued wives and responsibilities, fleeing from lucknow to play chess in a tiny village untouched by greater events. ray's basic theme in the film is the message that the self centredness, detachment and cowardice of india's ruling classes catalysed the annexation of awadh by a handful of british officials.
the role of captain weston, so british in his ways, but in love with urdu poetry, is also worth noting.
in the last scene, after which mir shoots at mirza and complains out loud "(if you die) i won't have a partner to play chess with", mirza responds to him "but you have one in front of you!" (thus making him understand that he forgives him). he finally concludes that "after nightfall, we will go back home. we both need darkness to hide our faces."


== cast ==
sanjeev kumar as mirza sajjad ali
saeed jaffrey as mir roshan ali
shabana azmi as khurshid, mirza's wife
richard attenborough as general james outram
farida jalal as nafisa, mir's wife
amjad khan as wajid ali shah
david abraham as munshi nandlal
victor banerjee as prime minister ("madar-ud-daula")
veena as the queen, mother of wajid ali shah.
farooq sheikh as aqueel
tom alter as captain weston, outram's aide de camp
leela mishra as hirya, khurshid's maid
saswati sen as kathak dancer in the song 'kanha main tose haari'
samarth narain as kallu
bhudo advani as abbajani
agha as abbajani's attendant - (uncredited)
barry john
kamu mukherjee


== reception ==
the film was well received upon it's release. despite the film's limited budget, the washington post critic gary arnold gave it a positive review; "he [ray] possesses what many overindulged hollywood filmmakers often lack: a view of history".


== awards and nominations ==


== preservation ==
the chess players was preserved by the academy film archive in 2010.


== see also ==
list of asian historical drama films
list of submissions to the 51st academy awards for best foreign language film
list of indian submissions for the academy award for best international feature film


== notes ==


== references ==
satyajit ray, the chess players and other screenplays. london: faber and faber, 1989. isbn 0-571-14074-2
andrew robinson, "satyajit ray's the chess players", history today, july 2007


== external links ==
the chess players at imdb
"shatranj ke khilari (the chess players)". satyajit ray official site. retrieved 24 april 2009.
"the chess players (shatranj ke khilari) - chess and movies". tuskerchess site. retrieved 29 december 2013.