police story is a 2007 kannada, action film, directed by thriller manju, starring sai kumar as a super cop reprising his role as agni ips. the film was a sequel to 1996 film of same name. the film was simultaneously dubbed into telugu under the same name, with p. ravi shankar, brother of sai kumar dubbing for shobraj in the telugu version


== plot ==
agni (saikumar) and vijay (rockline venkatesh) are the loyal cops. they face stiff opposition from godmother thimmakka(sana) in their objective of a crime free city. thimmakka who can make or break (in judiciary and politics) faces severe jolt when her son is gunned down by agni and vijay for rape and murder of call center girl. to bring in bad name to police power thimmakka unite the two underworld dons on a promise that they get prime positions. agni does not lose his courage even though his colleagues in the department turn in favor of thimmakka. he has the support of sincere chief minister (played by saikumar's father). in his killing spree of anti social elements that is also reply to thimmakka, agni becomes a nightmare. at this time the political moves changes the seat of power. a criminal who is a right hand of thimmakka becomes the chief minister. agni is at the receiving end. in the blood boiling situation, agni uses his intelligence and kills one of the two dons in the residence of chief minister in the pretext of security reasons. the cm who is also a don is confused about agni's moves. to finish off the power of agni another old rival black tiger (played by shobaraj) arrives. the emergence of black tiger is shocking not only for agni but for the entire police department. this black tiger was sentenced for capital punishment in the last scene of part one of the 'police story'. he has escaped the gallows corrupting the government officials what leads to dangerous situation. agni is on a hunt again. in the case of black tiger slipping away from gallows he finds three government officials interlinked in this case. when he finds all the three and brings them to a safe place to produce to the court all of them are killed by black tiger in an encounter. in the custody of agni three government officials gunned down is the black spot in his life. agni loses his trusted colleague vijay at this stage and he becomes alone. now he has very tough opponents for him. like a wounded tiger agni wages a lone battle. black tiger setting bombs in various places escapes to hong kong. in one of the bomb blasts agni loses his mother too. he chases black tiger in hong kong and it is as expected.


== cast ==
saikumar as agni
rockline venkatesh as vijay
p. j. sarma as chief minister
shanoor sana as kempamma
shobhraj as black tiger
thalapathy dinesh as tiger memon
g. v. sudhakar naidu as dharmaraj
ponnambalam
lambu nagesh
karibasavaiah
rami reddy
raghu babu


== production ==
police story 2 is a sequel to 1996 film of same name. the film retained most of its actors and technicians from the original version. saikumar said "when we decided to make a sequel, we wondered from where to begin. so we decided to extend the story to rayalaseema."


== critical reception ==
nowrunning wrote "police story part ii' looks every inch like the original in its narration, content, technical details and even the way the characters speak their dialogues. it is utterly crude with no space for sensibility and sensitivity." sify wrote "this is a power packed action extravaganza. a sequel to 'police story' released 10 years ago this film is updated in technology and is stylishly made. thriller manju has done a mind blowing job with eight action scenes and non stop punching dialogues from dialogue king saikumar in the role of agni is the redeeming feature of this film. this is a feast for the action lovers and those who love dialogue oriented films."


== references ==