polytechnique is a 2009 canadian drama film directed by denis villeneuve and written by villeneuve and jacques davidts. starring maxim gaudette, sebastien huberdeau, and karine vanasse, the film is based on the 1989 cole polytechnique massacre (also known as the "montreal massacre") and re-enacts the events of the incident through the eyes of two students (huberdeau and vanasse) who witness a gunman (gaudette) murder fourteen young women.
after a release in quebec in february 2009, it was featured in the 2009 cannes film festival. it received numerous honours, including nine genie awards, notably best motion picture.


== plot ==
a young man prepares his rifle and leaves a message for his mother. he then goes to polytechnique montreal, an engineering school, and enters a classroom during class with a rifle. he orders the men to leave and the women to stay. they comply after he shoots into the ceiling to show that he is serious. he tells the women that he hates feminists. although the women deny being feminists, he shoots at them, killing some and wounding others. he then moves through corridors and the cafeteria, specifically targeting women.
one of the male students is jean-franois, who was ordered to leave the classroom. instead of fleeing the scene, he returns to try to stop the killer and/or help the victims. valrie and stphanie, two surviving women, play dead thinking the killer has returned, although stphanie later dies of her injuries.
finally, the killer reaches another classroom where he kills a female lecturer. he then commits suicide, and his blood mixes with the blood of his victim.
some time after the massacre, jean-franois, feeling guilty for complying with the order to leave the classroom and abandoning the women, commits suicide by carbon monoxide poisoning. valrie, wearing the iron ring, the professional ring of canadian engineers, learns she is pregnant.  she makes plans to tell a potential son to be loving or a potential daughter that the world belongs to her.


== cast ==
maxim gaudette as the killer
sbastien huberdeau as jean-franois
karine vanasse as valrie
evelyne brochu as stphanie
johanne-marie tremblay as jean-franois' mother
natalie hamel-roy as jean-franois' mother (voice)
pierre-yves cardinal as ric
the rest of the cast listed alphabetically:


== production ==


=== development ===
karine vanasse, who played valrie, helped produce polytechnique, and wanted to make a film about the massacre for years. she helped secure director denis villeneuve for the film, who at the time was respected for making the 2000 film maelstrm. despite the sensitivity to the incident in quebec, villeneuve asserted it was not too soon for a film, and that there was an important conversation to be had.vanasse researched by speaking to the families of women killed in cole polytechnique de montral. in the film, one of the women tells the killer that the students are not feminists, with vanasse explaining, "one of the women who was there told me that it was the first time in her life that she had to confront her femininity head on".


=== filming ===

cole polytechnique de montral gave the filmmakers the right to use the campus as a location, but villeneuve opted against filming there to be respectful. the film was shot at cgep de maisonneuve and collge ahuntsic as well as griffintown and westmount. villeneuve shot the film in black and white, so as to avoid the presence of blood on screen.there were two versions of the film produced, one in english and one in french. the director denis villeneuve hoped the film would enter into the english-canadian market, as well as the u.s. one. villeneuve said the subject matter was challenging for the cast and crew to work with.


== release ==
polytechnique was screened at the directors' fortnight at the 2009 cannes film festival on 17 may. it was also featured in festivals in london, spain and namur in fall 2009.the film was released on 6 february 2009, in quebec, and on 20 march 2009, in toronto, vancouver and calgary. its release sparked controversy in quebec and across canada for its depiction of real life events involving the murder of unarmed students. the film was shown in 45 theatres in quebec. by august 2009, the distributor remstar had sold screening rights to around 12 countries.alliance films and remstar released the film on dvd and blu-ray in august 2009, along with french language documentary films on the real massacre. it was showcased in the museum of modern art in new york city in summer 2011.


== reception ==


=== box office ===
the film grossed $326,000 in quebec cinemas during its opening weekend, ranking first at the quebec box office. by august 2009, it grossed $1.6 million. in english canadian areas, it grossed $100,000. it was considered a financial hit in quebec.


=== critical response ===
the film has received mostly positive reviews from film critics. review aggregator rotten tomatoes reports that 87% of professional critics gave the film a positive review based on 15 reviews, with an average rating of 6.98/10. on metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 63 out of 100 based on 6 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews". in canada, peter howell of the toronto star gave the film three and a half stars out of four, stating "polytechnique makes no judgments, offers no panaceas. it shows the violence, faithfully recreating the historical record, but it doesn't wallow in it. pierre gill's brilliant monochrome lensing minimizes the effect of the blood. [...] it stands as a work of art, summoning unspoken thoughts the way picasso's war abstraction guernica does in a scene of contemplation with jean-franois." katherine monk of canwest news services gave the film four stars out of five; "the paradox may sound grotesque, but it must be stated loud and clear: denis villeneuve and the cast of polytechnique have transformed the tragedy of the montreal massacre into a work of profound beauty."critics compared polytechnique, favorably or unfavorably, to gus van sant's palme d'or winning 2003 film elephant. in the new york times, a.o. scott wrote that like villeneuve's later film incendies, polytechnique was a statement on decency being more powerful than savagery, and benefited from a rational look on an extreme matter. in variety, rob nelson compared it unfavourably to halloween (1978) and other violent horror films, but gave it marks for addressing the misogyny of the crime. ray bennett criticized the film in the hollywood reporter for not examining the psychology of the killer, and could not understand why the characters did not pull the fire alarm. denis seguin of screen daily gave the film a favourable review, writing "polytechnique is a formalist interpretation of an atrocity, with a cool perspective on the events and much for audiences to read between the frames as the film moves back and forth through time." time out gave it four stars, saying it avoided tabloid journalism and foreshadowed the message of forgiveness in the face of horror in incendies.


=== accolades ===
in presenting the rogers best canadian film award to polytechnique in january 2010, toronto film critics association president brian d. johnson called it a "film of astonishing courage."


== notes ==


== see also ==
cole polytechnique massacre
cinema of quebec
list of quebec films


== references ==


== external links ==
polytechnique at imdb
filming polytechnique