pooja (transl.prayer ritual) is a 1975 telugu-language film directed by murugan-kumaran and produced by avm productions. it is a remake of the 1974 kannada film eradu kanasu.


== plot ==
ramachandra rao/ramu (ramakrishna) falls in love with a beautiful girl, lalitha (manjula) who is also his cousin. he loves her so deeply that he wants to marry her at any cost. his father (kanta rao) is the head of the village, his mother (savitri) a housewife. due to some internal disputes between ramachandra rao's parents and lalitha's parents, lalitha's father (mikkilineni) denies the proposal. later according to his parents wish, ramachandra rao is forced to marry another girl, gouri (vanisri) the daughter of a lawyer (relangi). but he refuses to accept her as his wife as he is already in love with lalitha, and does not behave properly with gouri (now his wife). his parents observe their son's behavior and leave for pilgrimage, thinking that their absence will bring both wife and husband together. gouri is very obedient though she is well educated and rich. she loves her husband very much and expects the same from him like any other wife. but her husband continues to neglect her. she even asks him the reason for rejecting her. he says that he is helpless and asks her to go to her mother's place. she refuses to leave and continues to stay in the same house along with her husband. she prays to her favorite god daily with great devotion. god listens to her at the end and her husband accepts her as his wife and gives her all his love.


== cast ==


== crew ==
production company : avm productions
producers : m. murugan, m. kumaran, m. saravanan, m. balu
director : murugan kumaran
story : vani
dialogues : n. r. nandi
editing : r. g. gopi
art : a. k. shekhar
cinematography : s. maruthi rao
lyrics : dasaradhi and kosaraju raghavaiah
playback singers : s. p. balasubrahmanyam, vani jayaram, p. susheela, l. r. eswari
music director : rajan-nagendra


== songs ==
it was a musical hit especially for the superhit song ennenno janmala bandham.
the lyrics were by dasaradhi. some songs were sung by s. p. balasubrahmanyam and vani jayaram.
the song enneno janmala bandham is known for its captivating lyrics.three songs from the kannada original were retained by rajan-nagendra in the telugu version. the original song endendu ninnanu marethu was retained in the telugu version as enneno janmala bandham. the original song baadi hoda balliyinda was retained in the telugu version as malleteega vaadipoga marala poolu pooyuna. the original song poojisalende hoogala thande was retained in the telugu version as poojalu cheya poolu tecchanu.
"anthata nee roopam" (singers: s. p. balasubrahmanyam, vani jayaram)
"enneno janmala bandham" - (singer: s. p. balasubrahmanyam, vani jayaram)
"malleteega vaadipoga marala poolu pooyuna" (singer: s. p. balasubrahmanyam)
"nee daya raadaa raama nee daya raadaa" (singer: p. susheela)
"ningi nela okatayene" (singers: s. p. balasubrahmanyam, vani jayaram)
"poojalu cheya poolu tecchanu" (singer: vani jayaram)


== references ==


== external links ==
pooja at imdb