pookkalam varavayi (transl.spring arrives) is 1991 indian malayalam-language comedy-drama film directed by kamal and written by ranjith from a story by p. r. nathan. starring jayaram, sunitha, shamili, murali, and geetha. divya unni and kavya madhavan made their debuts in the film; dileep also made his debut as an assistant director. the plot revolves around the friendship between a school bus driver, nandan, and a little girl, geethu.


== plot ==
five-year-old geethu's parents get divorced, so she now stays 4days a week with her mom and 3 days with her dad as per the court's order. she becomes friendly with nandan (jayaram), the driver of her school bus.
during her christmas vacation, geethu decides to go to nandan's village without informing her parents. nandan's sister had recently lost her daughter, who was the same age as geethu, when she drowned in the village river. geethu wins the heart of everyone in the village and becomes the center of attention there. meanwhile, her parents are worried about their missing child and are searching for her everywhere.
finally, they learn where geethu is and come to the village to retrieve her. geethu also falls into the river  the same way nandan's niece drowned  but is rescued by nandan. the tension and anxiety unite her parents and they decide to live together again.


== cast ==
jayaram as nandan
sunitha as thulasi
baby shamili as geethu
murali as jayaraj
geetha as usha
innocent as pothuval
jagathy sreekumar as cherukunnathu bhaskara pillai
rekha as nirmala
thikkurissy sukumaran nair as muthachan
kaviyoor ponnamma as nandan's mother
philomina as akkamma
sankaradi as the priest
kalpana as the tuition teacher
meenakumari as  jayaraj's sister
kuthiravattam pappu as mariyappan
paravoor bharathan as bus driver
kavya madhavan as first school girl
divya unni as second school girl
baby charishma as third school girl


== soundtrack ==
all music is composed by ouseppachan.


== references ==


== external links ==
pookkalam varavayi at imdb