praja (transl.citizen) is a 2001 indian malayalam-language political thriller film directed by joshiy and written by renji panicker. it was also produced by joshiy and panicker. the film stars mohanlal, n. f. varghese, anupam kher, cochin haneefa, and aishwarya. the film's songs were composed by m. g. radhakrishnan, while c. rajamani provided the background score.


== plot ==
ex-underworld don zakkir ali hussein, after giving up violence, is settled peacefully in the suburbs of kochi. it was under the strong influence of his foster father, bappu haji mustafa, that he left mumbai. an unsuccessful assassination attempt on haji mustafa in mumbai by raman naik, an underworld don ignites old wounds in zakir. he, despite repeated pleas from haji mustafa and ilanthaloor rama varma, a father like figure, sets out to mumbai along with his trusted lieutenant hamid plavilakandi mather, alias malayalees.
with the help of his friend arjun, zakir kills down raman naik and reaches back in kochi. on his way back, at kochi, he meets up with maya mary kurien, asst. commissioner of police, who slowly starts developing a crush on him. zakir hussein is visited by balaraman, a liquor baron and a former m.p and m.l.a, who warns zakkir of dire consequences if he continues to interfere in the mumbai crime world. he also attempts to woo zakir, but the latter refuses to bow down, sending strong warning to balaraman and his group.
balaraman, along with devadevan nambiar, alias dd, and arun naik, the brother of raman naik in mumbai, is planning to finish off zakir hussein and haji mustafa to regain the lost turf in mumbai. they are supported by the tainted, savagery and two-faced lahayil vakkachan, home minister of kerala. joseph madachery, the d.i.g of police conducts a raid at haji mustafa's poor home on behalf of vakachan, and beats up rama varma thirumulpad brutally, but the sudden arrival of zakir saves him. joseph is severely beaten by zakir in full public presence, which infuriates balaraman and dd, who try to demoralize zakir by publishing fabricated stories about his relationship with acp maya kurein and inmates of haji mustafa trust's destitute home.
lahayil vakachan tries to create a truce between zakir and balaraman, but fails miserably and gets violently berated and stripped in the presence of a lady m.l.a by zakir. this leads to a series of problems, including the arrest of jaganathan (appu), a close buddy of zakir, on false narcotic drug charges from haji mustafa trust. left with no other option, zakir decides to meet the chief minister for appu's release from unlawful apprehension. then, joseph arrests zakir for providing refuge to appu and hoarding drugs in the trust's medicine store (a forged charge) - later, zakir is released.
a well coordinated murder attempt is made on zakir by professional assassins hired from bombay, he escapes valiantly - defeating the hitmen. jaganathan is killed in police custody. balaraman and dd kills rama varma thirumulpad, which prompts zakir to take the law in his own hands. at a public gathering - a three day convention organised to commemorate the 50th anniversary of vakkachan's political entry - while addressing thousands of party workers, zakir hussein enters by duping police and kills lahayil vakkachan, balaraman, devadevan and joseph.


== cast ==
mohanlal as zakkir ali hussein
biju menon as arjun
cochin haneefa as hamid plaavullakandi methar / malayalees
babu namboothiri as ramavarma thirumalpadu
aishwarya as asp maya mary kurien ips
manoj k. jayan as sp david abraham ips
n. f. varghese as lahayil vakkachan, home minister of kerala
shammi thilakan as balaraman
vijayaraghavan as devadevan nambiar (dd)
vijayakumar as jagannathan alias appu
baburaj as dig joseph madacherry ips
jagannatha varma as mannel mammachan
mahesh anand as raman naik
devan as police officer
anupam kher as haji mustafa
suresh krishna as unni pisharodi, a journalist
sukumari as appu's mother
sandra amy as arjun's girlfriend
subair as ci somendran
sindhu shyam as parukkutty
ponnamma babu as girija
irshad as sundaram, the driver
jose pellissery as priest
ravali as diana
nandhu pothuval as politician
jolly easow as kunjumol mla


== soundtrack ==
the features songs composed by m. g. radhakrishnan, and written by gireesh puthenchery, m. d. rajendran, and m. p. muralidharan. the soundtrack also includes the song "yeh zindagi usi ki hai" from the 1953 film anarkali. the soundtrack album was released by satyam audios on 19 july 2001.


== references ==


== external links ==
praja at imdb