premer kahini (translation: story of love) is a 2008 bengali musical romantic drama film by ravi kinagi and the cinematography was done by chota k. naidu. the movie features dev, koyel mullick, jisshu sengupta and ranjit mallick. this movie was the third film of bengali actor dev, after the films agnishapath and i love you.this movie is an official remake of kannada blockbuster film mungaru male.


== plot ==
akash (dev) and barsha (koyel mullick) met just by mere accident at metropolish fame mall. akash fell in love with barsha instantly. however, he lost contact with barsha and could not track her address by any means. he was visiting a marriage ceremony of the daughter of his mom's friend and to his surprise, he found the bride was barsha herself.


== cast ==
dev as akash
koel mallick  as barsha
ranjit mallick as barsha's father
moushumi saha as akash's mother
kalyani mandal as barsha's mother
diganta bagchi as cameo
shyamal dutta as akash's father
jisshu sengupta as major gautam (barsha's fianc)


== music ==
the music of premer kahini, composed by jeet gannguli and lyrics written by priyo chattopadhyay, gautam sushmit was released in india on 15 august 2008. media partner of premer kahini is bengali music channel sangeet bangla. the soundtrack 'tumi chara' is a bengali version of the song 'quit playing games with my heart' by american boy band backstreet boys.


== critical reception ==
the ddlj sameness does not end there. the lovebirds romance on the terrace, night after night, like raj and simran did. they sing and dance in the rain, around trees and on mountains sporting trendy jackets and chiffon saris. dev is a show stealer from the start. he woos koel  and also the viewers  with his easy charm. koel keeps up the coy lady act. jisshu's chocolatey looks manage to draw many "oohs" and "aahs" from the college-going crowd at the evening show in bharati.just as you had desperately wanted raj to end up with simran in dilwale dulhaniya le jayenge, you almost will best man akash on to win barsha's hand in premer kahini. though it has several flashes of the shah rukh-kajol-starrer, director ravi kinnagi adds novelty to the script and makes premer kahini an engaging watch.ravi kinnagi is an intelligent young man. he writes, directs and edits his films himself and even writes the screenplay. he has the guts to pack in newcomers and jeet made his strikingly successful debut in saathi directed by harnatha chakrobarty. he puts in a lot of action and fight scenes, song and dance numbers inspired by popular hindi masala and generally has a storyline that makes for a wonderful recipe of a family drama the kinnagi way. kinnagi is also a metaphor for the widening of the geographical canvas of bengali cinema because he belongs to orissa though he has now made kolkata is home. other stalwarts and newcomers from the orissa film industry and actors from bengal are happily changing places between cinema of the two states, making for a stable marriage between the otherwise unfriendly but similar cultures.
shot on an astounding budget of rs.2.5 crores, the best thing about the film is that a major portion of the film has been shot against picturesque backdrops of beautiful locations of bangalore, sakaleshpura, melukote and jog falls.


== references ==


== external links ==
www.screenindia.com review
www.telegraphindia.com  review
www.telegraphindia.com  review
www.telegraphindia.com  review