prince is a 1969 hindi movie produced by f. c. mehra and directed by lekh tandon. the film stars shammi kapoor with vyjayanthimala in the lead while rajendranath, ajit, helen, leela chitnis and asit sen form an ensemble cast. the film's music was composed by shankar jaikishan with lyrics by hasrat jaipuri and faruk qaiser. prince is a drama set in the times of resurgent india when the nation threw off the british yoke, but some states still languished under the princely yoke. it is the story of a prince who brought about his own downfall so that he may rise as a human being. vayjayanthimala got married in 1968 and then completed this film in 1969.
the rights to this film are owned by shah rukh khan's red chillies entertainment.


== plot ==
rajkumar shamsher singh is the only son of the local maharaja, and has been brought up as a brat, and now he is an irresponsible, alcoholic, and womanizing adult, who wants everyone to bow down before him and his princely rank. one priest refuses to do so, and shamsher pummels him mercilessly, though in vain. frustrated, he asks the priest what he should do with his mundane life, and the priest tells him that he should repent, sacrifice all his palatial pleasures, and live the life of a simple and ordinary man, and hence learn the true meaning of life, for at least six months. shamsher agrees to do so, and arranges an accident with his car, which plummets down a mountain, explodes and is blown to smithereens. everyone in the palace believes that shamsher is dead. he goes to a nearby village, and a blind woman there mistakes him for her long-lost son and starts calling him sajjan singh. shamsher decides to play along as sajjan.
two corrupt palace officials spot sajjan, and notice his similarity to shamsher, and conspire with him to pose as shamsher for a hefty sum of money, to which sajjan agrees. when he accompanies the officials back to the palace, he is shocked to find that his father has remarried a much younger woman, ratna, and shortly after marrying her, has died, leaving the palace and its management to her and her greedy brother. shamsher decides to reveal his true identity, but the officials threaten to expose him to his new-found blind mother, and shamsher knows that he is trapped in the body of sajjan singh, forced to pose as none other than himself.


== cast ==
shammi kapoor plays the character of prince shamsher singh. shamsher is also the real name of shammi kapoor.

shammi kapoor as prince shamsher singh
vyjayanthimala as princess amrita
rajendra nath as vilayatiram
ajit as ratna's brother
helen as sophia
leela chitnis as mrs. shanti singh
parveen choudhary as ratna
sudhir as sajjan singh
sunder as zoravar
rashid khan zorawar singh
sapru (actor) as the king of jamnapur
ulhas as the king of ramnagar
leela mishra as kamla
david abraham as diwan
randhir (actor) as michael
pinchoo kapoor as colonel
bramh bharadwaj as commissioner
shyam kumar as ratan assistant of king of jamnapur
rajan kapoor as dacoit
asit sen as dacoit's man
maqsood as a guest in shamsher's birthday party


== production team ==
f. c. mehra and lekh tandon had previously worked with vyjayanthimala in the historical film amrapali (1966). the team of producer f. c. mehra, director lekh tandon, actor shammi kapoor and musicians shankar-jaikishan had earlier worked together on the hit film professor (1962).  f.c. had also worked with shammi earlier in mujrim (1958), ujala (1959) and singapore (1960).


== soundtrack ==
the film's soundtrack was composed by the shankar jaikishan duo, while the lyrics were penned by hasrat jaipuri and faruk qaiser. the album had mohammed rafi, lata mangeshkar and asha bhosle who lent their voice to shammi kapoor, vyjayanthimala and helen respectively.


== box office ==
at the end of its theatrical run, the film grossed around 4,00,00,000 with a net of 2,00,00,000, thus becoming the fourth highest grossing film of 1969 with a verdict of super hit at box office india.


== references ==


== external links ==
prince at imdb
prince profile at upperstall.com