prithvi is a 2010 indian kannada language action drama film directed by jacob varghese, produced by n.s rajkumar, starring puneeth rajkumar and parvathy in lead roles. manikanth kadri composed the music of the film.


== plot ==
prithvi kumar (puneeth rajkumar) is an  young ias officer who  works as district collector for bellary district. his main aim is to eradicate the ongoing corruption in the district and stick to his principles: honesty and corruption-free administration.
once he takes office, he discovers that the people of the area are drinking contaminated water, that is polluted by unstoppable illegal mining companies, daily. he notices that people fall ill due to the polluted water and foresees the future may be very critical if the people continue to have the same water for drinking.
his mission is to find out the reason behind the polluted water. he seizes all illegal mining companies around bellary with no mercy. as a result, bellary mining lords try to kill him.
how prithvi reacts to bellary mining lords conspiracy, even dare to question government's decision and be successful in his mission against illegal mining companies is the further story of the film.


== cast ==
puneeth rajkumar as prithvi kumar
parvathy as priya, prithvi kumar's wife
srinivasa murthy as prithvi kumar's father
sathyapriya as gowri, prithvi kumar's mother
ramesh bhat as priya's father
padmaja rao as priya's mother
c. r. simha as the home minister of karnataka
avinash as narasimha nayak
john kokkin as nagendra nayak
sadhu kokila as tirupathi
prakash urs
john vijay as inspector suryaprakash
achyuth kumar as sharanappa
shivaji jadhav as narayanappa
padma vasanthi as basavaraj's wife
mico shivu
anil
spoorthi as aarti, prithvi kumar's sister


== soundtrack ==
manikanth kadri scored the film's background music and composed its soundtrack, lyrics for which was penned by jayant kaikini, k. kalyan and kaviraj. the soundtrack album consists of six tracks. actress and singer shruti haasan made her debut as a playback singer for a kannada track with "nenapidu nenapidu". saxophonist kadri gopalnath, also the father of the composer manikanth kadri, lent bits to the track "kukkoo kogileyinda". the album was released in bangalore on 11 april 2010. anand audio distributed the album into the market.


== release ==
the movie ran for 8 weeks in main theater sagar and additional 2 weeks in menaka (10 weeks). the movie was critically acclaimed & became hit in a centers and multiplex but flopped in b & c centres. the movie attained cult status after being telecasted in tv .
the movie was dubbed in malayalam and telugu as prithvi ias.


== references ==


== external links ==
prithvi at imdb