private buckaroo is a 1942 american comedy musical film directed by edward f. cline starring the andrews sisters, dick foran, harry james, shemp howard, joe e. lewis, and jennifer holt. the film tells the story of army recruits following basic training, with the andrews sisters attending uso dances.


== plot ==
entertainer lon prentice initially is keen to enlist in the us army but is prevented from this due to his having one flat foot.  after having the flat fixed, he is accepted for enlistment. soon after basic training begins, private prentice informs his commanding officer that he finds most military training useless, unnecessary and beneath him.  his commander orders all the men that private prentice is exempt from doing things he doesn't want to do, which turns the entire camp against him.


== cast ==
the andrews sisters (maxene andrews, patty andrews and laverne andrews)
dick foran	as lon prentice
joe e. lewis as lancelot pringle mcbiff
jennifer holt as joyce mason
shemp howard as first sgt. 'muggsy' shavel
richard davies as lt. howard mason
mary wickes as bonnie-belle schlopkiss
ernest truex as col. elias weatherford
donald o'connor as donny
peggy ryan as peggy
huntz hall as cpl. anemic
susan levine as tagalong
jivin' jacks and jills as vocal group
harry james as the music makers (as harry james and his music makers)


== soundtrack ==
dick foran - "private buckaroo" (written by charles newman and allie wrubel)
the andrews sisters - "three little sisters" (written by irving taylor and vic mizzy)
dick foran - "i'm in the army now"
the andrews sisters - "six jerks in a jeep" (written by sid robin)
the andrews sisters - "don't sit under the apple tree" (written by sam h. stept and charles tobias)
the andrews sisters - "james session" danced by donald o'connor, peggy ryan and the jivin' jacks and jills
the andrews sisters - "steppin' out tonight" based on the song "that's the moon, my son" (written by art kassel and sammy gallop.
dick foran and helen forrest - "nobody knows the trouble i've seen"
harry james and his music makers - "concerto for trumpet"
the andrews sisters - "johnny get your gun again" (written by don raye and gene de paul)
dick foran and the andrews sisters - "we've got a job to do" (written by vickie knight)
joe e. lewis - "i love the south"
helen forrest with harry james and his music makers - "you made me love you" (written by joseph mccarthy and james v. monaco)


== see also ==
public domain film
list of american films of 1942
list of films in the public domain in the united states


== external links ==
private buckaroo at imdb
private buckaroo is available for free download at the internet archive