professor is a 1962 hindi film, produced by f. c. mehra and directed by lekh tandon. the film stars shammi kapoor, kalpana, bela bose, lalita pawar, tun tun and iftekhar. the film's music is by shankar jaikishan.  the film became a box office hit. the film was remade in tamil as nadigan (1990), in telugu twice as bhale mastaru (1969), peddinti alludu (1991), in kannada as gopi krishna  and in hindi as dil tera ashiq (1993). the rights to this film are owned by shah rukh khan's red chillies entertainment.


== plot ==
sita devi verma (lalita pawar), situated in darjeeling is the guardian to two young women (nina and rita) and two school children (bunty and munnu) in her care. she is a strict guardian and the four often disobey her and create mischief behind her back. she is looking for a professor as a tutor, her only condition being that he should be above 50 years of age. pritam khanna (shammi kapoor), a young college graduate in dire need of work, applies for the job and get dejected after being rejected due to his age. the same day, he discovers his mother (pratima devi) has an advanced stage of tuberculosis and needs hospitalization. due to financial difficulties, he disguises himself as an older professor and takes the job.
the women do not want a professor and try every trick in the book to defame the professor in the eyes of sita devi. pritam soon catches on and defeats them at their own game. he falls in love with nina and woos her as a young man in the city. chaos ensues when sita devi develops feelings towards old prof. khanna and pritam has to romance the two ladies in different disguises at the same time.


== cast ==
initially dev anand and raj kapoor were approached for the lead role of pritam but they did not accept.

shammi kapoor...professor pritam khanna
randhir (actor)....professor sahab
salim khan...ramesh
kalpana...neena verma
lalita pawar...sita devi verma
parveen choudhary...rita verma
pratima devi...mrs. khanna
rashid khan...hanuman singh
bela bose...hanuman singh's daughter
tun tun...phool rani
iftekhar...artist
bir sakuja...ramesh's father
moolchand...jeweller
ratan gaurang...hotel boy chang
maqsood...hotel waiter
ratnamala...sita devi's friend from tribal village
m.a. latif...doctor treating rita verma


== soundtrack ==
all the songs were composed by shankar jaikishan.


== awards and nominations ==
won: filmfare best music director award - shankar jaikishan
nominated: filmfare award for best actor - shammi kapoor
nominated: filmfare award for best supporting actress - lalita pawar
nominated: filmfare award for best lyricist - hasrat jaipuri for the song "aye gulbadan"
nominated: filmfare award for best male playback singer - mohammed rafi for the song "aye gulbadan"


== references ==


== external links ==
professor at imdb