promises in the dark is a 1979 american drama film directed by jerome hellman and written by loring mandel. the film stars marsha mason, ned beatty, susan clark, michael brandon, kathleen beller and paul clemens. the film was released by warner bros. and orion pictures on november 2, 1979.


== plot ==
numbed by career demands and a recent divorce, dr. alexandra kendall (marsha mason) hides behind a hard shell of professional detachment. then she treats buffy koenig (kathleen beller), a dying 17-year-old cancer patient who reawakens kendall to life's possibilities. eventually, buffy's deteriorating forces dr. kendall to weigh the consequences of keeping a promise she made to her.


== cast ==
marsha mason as dr. alexandra kendall
ned beatty as bud koenig
susan clark as fran koenig
michael brandon as dr. jim sandman
kathleen beller as elizabeth (buffy) koenig
paul clemens as gerry hulin
donald moffat as dr. walter mcinerny
philip sterling as dr. frucht
bonnie bartlett as nurse farber
james noble as dr. blankenship
arthur rosenberg as emergency room doctor
peggy mccay as miss pritikin
robert doran as alan
lenora may as sue
alexandra johnson as ellie
fran bennett as emergency room nurse
eloise hardt as woman in restaurant
bernie kuby as tony in bud's office
karen anders as secretary in bud's office
edith fields as mrs. gans
alice beardsley as mrs. keyes


== production ==
writer loring mandel conceived the story for promises in the dark while he was employed as head writer on the daytime drama love of life. when the soap's executive producer darryl hickman rejected the idea, mandel quit the show and developed the plot into a feature screenplay.
the project was initially in development at united artists, with actress elizabeth ashley cast in the starring role and john schlesinger set to direct, with arnold schulman and jerome hellman producing. however, with the exception of hellman, no one remained with the project, and the project was inactive for many years. arthur krim, chairman at the newly formed orion pictures, selected the script as one of the companys first projects on the strength of hellmans previous productions, such as midnight cowboy and coming home. in addition to serving as producer, hellman served as director.


== references ==


== external links ==
promises in the dark at imdb
promises in the dark at the american film institute catalog