pudhiya geethai (transl. new gita) is a 2003 indian tamil-language supernatural drama film written and directed by newcomer k. p. jagan. the film stars vijay as a optimist in the main lead role with meera jasmine and ameesha patel in the female lead roles. kalabhavan mani and karunas play other supporting roles. notably, this film is patel's first and remains her only tamil film till date. the film, which has music scored by brothers yuvan shankar raja and karthik raja, released on 8 may 2003 to negative reviews and became a commercial failure. the movie was dubbed in hindi as ek dumdaar the powerful. the film tells the tale of a man who has positive attitude in his life and overcomes his own fate. the story starts with the hero at his birth and an astrologer tells the couple that the hero will die at the age of 27. the story tells that whether the hero will die at the age of 27 or not.
even though the film was a failure, the satellite rights were sold to sun tv for a good price for its new theme introduced in tamil cinema.the main highlight of the film was the climax and the audience were awestruck, as mentioned by the astrologer optimist sarathy met with a accident at the age of 27, and gets admitted in the hospital and asks the doctors to close all the window doors of his hospital bedroom, so that his soul doesn't escape from his body and remains intact with his body.
after many years of release till now, the film still holds a good trp in sun tv and also k-tv and acquired cult status.


== plot ==
the movie starts with a polydactylic baby boy born to chinnaya (nassar) from nagapattinam, who works for swamy (k. vishwanath), an astrologer. swamy writes the horoscope of the baby and understands that the child will grow up to be an intelligent and responsible person but, he also predicts that the child's life will be only 27 years short. he suggests the baby to be named sarathy but does not inform about the short life.
back to the present in chennai, sarathy (vijay) is an intelligent person who excels in studies and sports and is also liked by everyone around him. he takes care of his mother thaiyalnayagi  (kalairani) and sister, following his father's death. suji (meera jasmine) is sarathy's close friend and considers him as her well-wisher. sarathy runs a restaurant with his friends as part-time and is also involved in real estate transactions earning brokerages. jo (ameesha patel) is suji's friend who teases her by being closer to sarathy, revealing the love that she had for him. 
reddiyar (kalabhavan mani) is a rich but ingenuous businessman. he is into real estate business and cheats many people by allotting improper plots. sarathy knows about reddiyar's plans and fight against him supporting the poor people, which creates enmity between reddiyar and sarathy.
lawrence (sanjeev) is sarathy's friend. he falls in love with sarathy's sister but is scared whether sarathy will accept their love. sarathy happily accepts and also convinces his mother. sarathy's sister's wedding is arranged. now, sarathy is 27 years old. meanwhile, suji feels jealous about sarathy and jo getting close to each other, but jo realizes that suji is in love with sarathy. finally, suji proposes her love to sarathy, which he accepts.
on the day of sarathy's sister's marriage, jo explains the love that suji has for sarathy and vice versa. sarathy goes to meet suji, but reddiyar has planned to kill sarathy on the way. sarathy fights reddiyar's men, and reddiyar is left alone. however, sarathy does not kill reddiyar and instead makes him understand the value for life and the talks about the positive attitude that one should have. this makes reddiyar realize his mistake.
sarathy leaves the place to meet suji but meets with an accident on the way and gets admitted to the hospital with severe injuries. the doctors say that the chances of his survival are minimal, and all his friends cry outside the hospital, but reddiyar comes to the place. he asks everyone to stop crying and keeps calling sarathy with a positive energy, which will make him get back to normal. everyone starts calling sarathy and his condition improves drastically. sarathy is saved and recovers. the movie ends with a message that a positive attitude is essential for everyone to succeed and to good men, and even death will revive them, then sarathy lives 100 years of his wish leads his life happily.


== cast ==


== production ==
in august 2002, vijay signed on to work on the film, which was initially titled sarathy after the lead character. the project was then titled as geethai with esha deol as heroine. however the film eventually featured two lead actresses with meera jasmine being signed on to be a part of the project after the success of her 2002 film, run. amisha patel also accepted to be a part of the film, replacing deol, after getting the entire script translated in english for her to read. before release, the film's title was changed to pudhiya geethai.


== soundtrack ==
the songs were composed by yuvan shankar raja, while his elder brother karthik raja composed the film's background score. the audio cd containing songs released on 29 march 2003 and features 6 tracks, the lyrics were penned by vaali, pa. vijay, yugabharathi and vijay sagar. the film remains vijay's only collaboration with yuvan shankar raja.


== release ==
the film released on 8 may 2003. the satellite rights of the film were secured by sun tv. the film was given a "u" certificate by the indian censor board.


== reception ==
the film earned mostly negative reviews. the critic from the hindu stated that "the end is predictable, but the conviction with which the climax drives home the message makes it interesting." another reviewer stated the film had "nothing new", describing it as "real melodramatic soap-opera that moves hearts of viewers and at the same time gives a message for the audience."the film did not perform well at the box office.


== references ==


== external links ==
pudhiya geethai at imdb