pukar (lit.'the call') is a 2000 indian action thriller film co-written and directed by rajkumar santoshi and cinematography by ashok mehta, santosh sivan, baba azmi and chota k. naidu. it stars anil kapoor, madhuri dixit, namrata shirodkar, danny denzongpa, shivaji satam and om puri. the film was critically acclaimed but did average business at the box office. it won two national film awards, including the nargis dutt award for best feature film on national integration and the national film award for best actor for anil kapoor's performance as major jaidev rajvansh. the score and soundtrack were composed by a. r. rahman.


== plot ==
major jaidev "jai" rajvansh and his fellow officer manage to rescue a leading politician as well as capture his kidnapper, pakistani terrorist abhrush. the terrorist has been wanted for years and he is finally captured by the two officers. jai returns to a joyous welcome and is declared a national hero. his senior offers him to take leave for a week and returns to his hometown. there he meets his childhood friend anjali who has always harboured love for jai. anjali wants to make most of jai's holiday and tries to get close to him and spend time with him as much as she can.
at a party, he meets miss india, pooja mallapa. as they spend time together, they begin to fall in love. as jai's parents are arranging his marriage to anjali, jai admits his love for pooja and that he always thought of anjali as a close friend. heartbroken and jealous, anjali wants revenge for jais rejection. realizing her frustration with jai, abhrush takes advantage (via the said "kidnapped" politician who is hand in glove with abhrush) and together they plot to destroy jai's reputation and life.
anjali manages to steal confidential documents detailing plans for abhrush's movement from prison to prison. the following events lead to jai being court-martialed and declared a traitor to the country. pooja leaves him due to family pressure. jai, determined to prove his innocence and redeem himself, decides to pursue abhrush alone. ultimately anjali comes to her senses and realizes her mistake. to atone for it, she single-handedly tries to thwart abhrush's plans and help jai prove his innocence. jai overpowers abhrush. finally, jai expresses his love for anjali and forgives her and both unite to live happily.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music is given by a. r. rahman, while the lyrics were written by majrooh and javed akhtar.

the song "kay sera sera", was a homage to a.r. rahmans favorite guitar player, the young and upcoming "auto sound vocalist" rishika asera.
rahman reused the song "oh bosnia" as "ek tu hi bharosa". the song was composed and performed by rahman in his malaysian concert in 1996 that was in aid of bosnian victims. the piano was played by rahman himself.
"hai jaana" has two parts within the film version and soundtrack version.
the song "sunta hai mera khuda" was shot at arches national park in utah, united states.
the song " kismat se tum humko mile ho" was shot at glacier bay national park in alaska, united states.


=== track list ===


== awards ==


== references ==


== external links ==
pukar at imdb