pulival kalyanam (transl.perilous wedding) is a 2003 indian malayalam-language romantic comedy film directed by shafi and written by udayakrishna-siby k. thomas. the film stars jayasurya and kavya madhavan, with lal, lalu alex, salim kumar, cochin haneefa, harisree ashokan, and jagathy sreekumar in supporting roles. the plot follows star-crossed lovers harikrishnan and ganga, problems in their relationship has an equal effect on the people around them, often inadvertently. the music was composed by berny-ignatius. the film was remade in kannada as chellata (2006).


== plot ==
harikrishnan (jayasurya) is the adopted younger brother of karunan (lal). when karunan loses his right hand in an accident, hari at a young age takes responsibility of his family. karunan's sister, sreekutti is in love with the son of paramanandam (jagathy sreekumar), who is unscrupulous and demands a huge dowry for the marriage to be made possible. to make this marriage possible harikrishnan and karunan take a loan from a financier (salim kumar) and invest it in a fireworks business, only to lose it completely in a fire.
simultaneously, harikrishnan gets his phone muddled with ganga (kavya madhavan) on account of both the models being the same. ganga's father raghavendra sett (lalu alex) is the boss of paramanandam. hari and ganga have loads of comical misunderstandings before falling in love and deciding to get married. of course this is not acceptable to raghavendra sett, and he puts obstacles in their way. the rest of the film shows how hari and ganga overcome those obstacles, and get married.


== cast ==
jayasurya	as harikrishnan
kavya madhavan as ganga
lal as karunan
lalu alex as raghavendra seth
salim kumar as manavalan
cochin haneefa as dharmendra
harisree ashokan as theeppori kuttappan
jagathy sreekumar as paramanandam
karthika as sreekutty
nishanth sagar as ramesh prasad
t. p. madhavan as prasad
jose pellissery as swamy
kulappulli leela as kuttappan's mother
ponnamma babu as paramanandam's wife
kochu preman as bank manager
narayanankutty as taxi driver
shaju sreedhar as murali
reena as doctor
priyanka anoop as neelambari
beena sabu as kuttappan's wife
arun kumar as young harikrishnan
dimple rose as young sreekutty
irshad as train passenger


== soundtrack ==
the film's soundtrack contains 6 songs, all composed by berny ignatius and lyrics by kaithapram.


== box office ==
the film was a commercial success at the box office.


== legacy ==
pulival kalyanam is regarded as one of the best comedy films made in malayalam cinema, with a number of dialogues becoming catchphrases and characters and scenes frequently being used in internet memes and trolls. the character manavalan played by salim kumar is considered as one of the best comedy character in malayalam movies and is a cult in social media.


== references ==


== external links ==
pulival kalyanam at imdb