purani haveli (the old mansion) is a 1989 indian hindi-language horror film presented by ramsay brothers. the soundtracks were composed by ajit singh.


== plot ==
the film opens with a young couple raja and rita driving through a dense forest at night. tired and sleepy, they decide to stop for the night, and find a haveli (mansion) nearby. they fall asleep in the outskirts of the mansion. around midnight, the husband awakes all of a sudden and gets up to investigate. then a horrible monster attacks him. his wife wakes up hearing him scream and they are both killed by the monster. an old man narendra suddenly appears, a bit too late but eventually traps the monster in an underground cage and attaches a cross to the latch to keep him from escaping.
the story then shifts to the lives of kumar, an industrialist who lives with his wife seema and niece anita. since her parents death, anita has been living with her uncle who is also the legal custodian of her father's estate. seema wants anita to marry her brother vikram so that they can milk out the estate but anita does not approve of vikram and is in love with a photographer named sunil. kumar visits the mansion with an agent to buy the building but both of them are killed by the monster. a large group of some twenty-three folks go to the mansion for an outing. things get interesting when one of vikram's friends is killed by the iron statue. many interesting things happen in due course. seema and vikram get increasingly frustrated; anita is about to come of age and reclaim her estate, and vikram remains unsuccessful at wooing her. seema hatches a plot and she lures sunil into the tehkhana (dungeon) where vikram is waiting for both of them and attacks sunil from behind. he becomes unconscious and then they lock up the dungeon and leave sunil there thinking that he will eventually die and anita may eventually agree to wed vikram.
sunil recovers in the dungeon and wanders around till he hears the monster from his cage. he is about to open the cage when the old man suddenly appears and stops him from doing so. he leads sunil out of the dungeon tells him the story of his life and the monster. the old man reveals that twenty years ago he had arrived there from the city since his wife had undergone labour pains and it was necessary for her to deliver the baby and hence he ended up at the mansion for help. however he was repeatedly warned by a nun to go away and not let the delivery happen there because according to her, there was something extremely inhuman and unholy lurking within the mansion and if the delivery took place then that would eventually lead to the birth of evil. owing to the adverse condition of his wife, the man did not pay heed to the nun and his wife gave birth to their baby. however he was shocked when he realized that his wife gave birth to the devil and she died herself in the process and the nun was right. the grief-stricken man then locked the monster in the cage with the help of the nun and spent 20 years of his life in the same mansion so as to prevent the monster from hurting anyone. vikram goes back to the dungeon to check for himself that sunil is dead. he hears the monster and unknowingly releases him getting himself killed. the monster now free goes on a violent rampage, killing people everywhere. everybody vacates the mansion at once fleeing by bus. seema unwisely stays behind, tries to flee from another route and she got caught, raped and killed by monster.
the monster makes his way to the bus that has broken down by a church and the monster kills two girls and the old man as well. the monster enters the church and is tormented by the impulse of the almighty. he is finally impaled by a cross and his body set ablaze ending his reign of terror once and for all. the film ends with sunil and anita lighting candles at the church and starting a new life together.


== cast ==
deepak parashar as sunil
amita nangia as anita
satish shah as the twins mangu and kala gangu
neelam mehra as seema kumar
vijay arora as kumar
shehzad khan as anand
tej sapru as vikram
shobha as shobha
pinchoo kapoor as rana saheb
narendra nath as the old man
manik irani as the monster
anil dhawan as raja (cameo)
priti sapru as rita (cameo)
bhushan tiwari as dhambar singh
a.k agnihotri as jyoti
leela mishra as old woman in village
sikandar
raj kishore as sher khan
shyamlee
shehnaz kudia as priya
sunil dhawan as shanker (cameo)
chhote ustad as chhote dada
tina ghai as bhijli (wife of kala gangu)
sadhana khote
tushar
mahesh rodey
geetha singh
seema jain


== music ==
"kaise main bhulaoon" - anuradha paudwal
"sangmarmar sa tha" - suresh wadkar
"aata hai mujhko yaad" - suresh wadkar


== external links ==
purani haveli at imdb