pyar kiye jaa (transl.carry on loving) is a 1966 indian hindi-language romantic comedy film directed by c. v. sridhar starring kishore kumar, shashi kapoor, mehmood, om prakash, mumtaz, kalpana and rajasree. it was a "semi-hit" at the box office. the film is a remake of the tamil comedy kadhalikka neramillai (1964), which was remade into telugu as preminchi choodu in 1965. actress rajasree starred in all three versions of the film. kadhalikka neramillai was also later remade in kannada as preethi madu thamashe nodu  and in marathi as dhoom dhadaka. the role played by nagesh in the tamil version was reprised by mehmood in the hindi version and by dwarakish in the kannada version.


== cast ==
kishore kumar as shyam / rai bahadur ganga prasad
shashi kapoor as ashok verma
mehmood as atma
om prakash as ramlal
kalpana as malti
mumtaz as meena priyadarshini
rajasree as nirmala
chaman puri as devraj (shyam's father)
shivraj as masterji (ashok's father)


== plot ==
widower ramlal (om prakash) lives a wealthy lifestyle near poona, india along with two daughters and a son. his daughter, malti (kalpana), is a science graduate; nirmala (rajasree), a matriculate, and the son, atma (mehmood), who wants his dad to finance a hindi film, which he himself will produce under the banner of "wah wah productions", he even signs up a nubile and sexy meena priyadarshini (mumtaz), the daughter of ramlal's estate manager, to play the female lead role. ramlal would like to get his daughters married to families that are wealthier than him. he hires an assistant manager, ashok verma (shashi kapoor), to look after his estate, but fires him when he finds out that he has misbehaved with his daughters. ashok protests by putting up a tent in ramlal's front-yard. then shyam (kishore kumar) friend of ashok in disguise of elderly male comes to visit ramlal, he identifies himself as rai bahadur ganga prasad, claims he is very wealthy, and the estranged father of ashok. ramlal seizes this opportunity and asks rai bahadur to get ashok to marry one of his daughters. ashok and his dad reconcile, and ashok decides to marry nirmala. then ramlal gets another visitor, a wealthy elderly male by the name of devraj (chaman puri), who used to know ramlal during his school-days. ramlal and devraj talk about old times, and end up fixing up the marriage of malti with devraj's son shyam. ramlal introduces devraj to rai bahadur and starts preparations for both marriages  little knowing that soon he will find out that devraj's son has gone missing, perhaps refusing to marry someone his dad has chosen for him; ; devraj comes to know that ashok is actually the son of a poor school-teacher(shivraj). and reveals to ramlal  that rai bahadur is a fraud, ashok and shyam are arrested by the police for cheating ramlal,resulting a chaos, but finally all things and misunderstandings gets cleared up and they live happily ever after.


== soundtrack ==
all the songs were composed by laxmikant pyarelal and lyrics were penned by rajendra krishan.


== production ==
according to the book eena meena deeka: the story of hindi film comedy by sanjit narwekar, pyar kiye jaa was a "frame-by-frame" remake of sridhar's own kadhalikka neramillai.


== awards and nominations ==
filmfare best comedian award for mehmood
filmfare best comedian award  nomination  om prakashmehmood won the radhakrishan award for best comedian instituted by b r chopra in honour of yesteryear actor radhakrishan. mehmood acknowledged that om prakash, who played his father in the film, equally deserved the award and his fabulous reactions made the scenes more entertaining.


== references ==


== external links ==
pyar kiye jaa at imdb