qayamat se qayamat tak (transl.from doomsday till doomsday), also known by the initialism qsqt, is a 1988 indian hindi-language musical romance film, directed by mansoor khan, written and produced by his father nasir hussain, and starring his cousin aamir khan along with juhi chawla. the film was released on 29 april 1988 to critical acclaim, and was a major commercial success, and was a blockbuster turning aamir khan and juhi chawla into hugely popular stars. the plot was a modern-day take on classic tragic romance stories such as layla and majnun, heer ranjha, and romeo and juliet. qsqt, which "reinvented the romantic musical genre" in bollywood, was a milestone in the history of hindi cinema, setting the template for bollywood musical romance films that defined hindi cinema in the 1990s.the soundtrack of the film, composed by anand-milind, with lyrics written by majrooh sultanpuri, was equally successful, becoming one of the best-selling bollywood soundtrack albums of the 1980s with more than 8 million soundtrack albums sold, and with "papa kehte hain" (sung by udit narayan and picturised on aamir khan) being the most popular hit song from the album. the soundtrack was a breakthrough for the careers of anand-milind, as well as t-series, one of india's leading record labels. indiatimes movies ranks the movie amongst the "top 25 must see bollywood films". it won the national film award for best popular film providing wholesome entertainment, and eight filmfare awards from eleven nominations including best film, best director for mansoor khan, best male debut for aamir khan, and best female debut for juhi chawla.


== plot ==
dhanakpur village farmers thakur jaswant singh and dhanraj singh are brothers. they have a younger sister madhumati, who was impregnated and dumped by ratan singh, the son of thakur raghuveer singh from a rich rajput family. the family refuses jaswant singh's request to get his sister married to ratan and refuses ratan's role in madhu's current situation as they are interested in their status.
insulted, jaswant leaves the village. unable to tolerate the events, madhumati commits suicide. frustrated, dhanraj kills ratan at his wedding and gets imprisoned. the two families are now bitter enemies. jaswant moves to delhi develops his business, and reaches good status; he also raises dhanraj's kids. years later, dhanraj gets released from the prison and receives a letter from his son, rajvir raj, an ardent music lover, who completes his education in rajput college. an emotional dhanraj sneaks into raj's college farewell party and is glad to see his son fulfill his dreams.
in a twist of fate, raj and his cousin go to dhanakpur to clear his family's land deal. while returning home, raj falls for rashmi, a relative of raghuveer singh. raj sneaks into rashmi's birthday bash. the two meet again at a holiday spot. they become lost in the forest and fall in love while finding a way out. raj finds out about rashmi's family but is unable to tell her the truth. when randhir singh, rashmi's father, finds out about the affair, he immediately arranges rashmi's wedding to another man. the lovers take on their families and elope, dreaming of an idyllic life together.
furious, randhir hires a contract killer to target raj. the lovers have a brief interval of happiness. they stay in a deserted fort, happy in their own paradise. when randhir learns their whereabouts, he goes there to bring rashmi home and ensure that raj is killed. randhir's mother does not wish for this so she goes to dhanraj and tells him to save the lovebirds. raj leaves the fort to bring firewood for their house. while raj is away, randhir meets rashmi and tells her to come home, assuring her he has "accepted their love". rashmi is overjoyed at her father's words, not knowing the truth. in the forest, raj is chased by the henchmen.
dhanraj reaches the fort and repeatedly asks about his son's whereabouts. they get in a fight and a gunshot is heard. rashmi leaves the scene to make sure that raj is okay. he is about to be shot but, on seeing rashmi, the henchman shoots her instead. she is shot twice and rolls down the hill. raj overpowers the henchman and reaches rashmi's side, crying. they promise never to leave each other. on saying it that, rashmi breathes her last in raj's arms. a grief-stricken raj is devastated by rashmi's death and vows to not let anything separate them. he commits suicide by stabbing himself in the stomach with a knife, and dying beside the woman he loved.
the final scene is both families running toward them; the lovers are together, never to be separated, as the sun sets behind them.


== cast ==


== production ==
the film marked the directorial debut of mansoor khan, son of nasir hussain and his cousin aamir khan. the film was a tale of unrequited love and parental opposition, with khan portraying raj, a "clean-cut, wholesome boy-next-door". the plot was a modern-day take on classic tragic romance stories such as layla and majnun, heer ranjha, and romeo and juliet.mansoor recalled that his father nasir wanted to launch aamir as a leading actor and got convinced that mansoor would direct the film after watching his telefilm. the film was initially titled nafrat ke waaris before returning to original title.for the film's marketing, aamir khan was involved in promoting the film. he set up an outdoor ad campaign, which was a faceless poster that said, "who is aamir khan? ask the girl next door." with the help of his brother-in-law raj zutshi, khan also went around putting up posters on auto-rickshaws across mumbai.


== music ==
the soundtrack contains five songs composed by duo anand-milind, and songs written by veteran majrooh sultanpuri. all the tracks were sung by udit narayan, who sang for aamir khan and alka yagnik, who sang for juhi chawla.
pancham (r.d. burman) was to compose the soundtrack, but director mansoor khan wanted a young music director. that's how anand-milind, who had worked with him earlier on this tele-film, secured this project. mansoor selected narayan to sing all songs because he felt that his voice would suit aamir.the biggest hit song from the album was "papa kehte hain". majroosh saab (as he is fondly known) wrote the song at the age of 70. sung by narayan and picturised on aamir khan, the full title of the song is "papa kehte hain bada naam karega", which translates to "my dad says that i'll make him proud".qayamat se qayamat tak was the best-selling bollywood music soundtrack album of 1988, outselling tezaab, which itself had sold over 8 million units. qayamat se qayamat tak became one of the best-selling indian soundtrack albums of the 1980s. it was the first major hit album released by the record label t-series. prior to release, nasir hussain reportedly sold the film's music rights to t-series founder gulshan kumar for only 400,000 ($30,000).at the 34th filmfare awards, anand-milind won the best music director award, majrooh sultanpuri was nominated for best lyricist, and udit narayan won best male playback singer for "papa kehte hain".

all lyrics are written by majrooh sultanpuri; all music is composed by anand-milind.


=== popular culture ===
the hit "papa kehte hain":

was used in hum saath saath hain in a parody. it was rendered by the original singer udit narayan and re-written by ravinder rawal.
was used in dil (also starring aamir khan) during a college party scene.
was used in andaz apna apna (also starring aamir khan) in a comedy sequence.
was recreated by vishal-shekhar as a short song for the 2013 film student of the year, which was varun dhawan's debut, in which he sings while performing at a concert.
was used in the ajay devgn starrer, de de pyaar de everytime bhavin bhanushali's character, ishaan talks lovingly about ayesha (played by rakul preet singh), without knowing that she is his father's girlfriend (played by devgn).the song became successful in binaca geetmala.the song "aye mere humsafar" was recreated by mithoon and sung by mithoon and tulsi kumar for the 2015 film all is well. amitabh verma wrote additional lyrics for this version.the song "gazab ka hai din" was used in 2015 film masaan. the song "gazab ka hai din" was also recreated by tanishk bagchi and sung by jubin nautiyal & prakriti kakar for the 2018 film dil juunglee. tanishk bagchi wrote additional lyrics for this version.


== box office ==
qayamat se qayamat tak became a golden jubilee hit after running for 50 weeks. it earned a domestic net collection of 50 million ($4 million), and was a blockbuster that became the third highest-earning film of 1988, after tezaab and shahenshah. adjusted for inflation, the domestic net collection of qayamat se qayamat tak is equivalent to more than 1.4 billion ($16 million) in 2017.the film was also released in china, in 1991. it was aamir khan's first film released in china, two decades before he became a household name there in the 2010s after 3 idiots.


== accolades ==


== remakes ==
the film was remade in telugu as akkada ammayi ikkada abbayi, which marked the debut for telugu super star pawan kalyan. it was also remade in bangladesh as keyamat theke keyamat in 1993, marking it as the debut film for bangladeshi superstar salman shah and moushumi. it was also remade in sinhala as dalu lana gini starring damith fonseka and dilhani ekanayake


== legacy ==
qayamat se qayamat tak proved to be a major commercial success, catapulting both khan and chawla to stardom. it received seven filmfare awards including a best male debut trophy for khan and best female debut award for juhi chawla. 
 the film has since attained cult status. bollywood hungama credits it as a "path-breaking and trend setting film" for indian cinema.gautam chintamani's book qayamat se qayamat tak: the film that revived hindi cinema (2016) credits the film with revitalizing hindi cinema. in the late 1980s, hindi cinema was experiencing a decline in box office turnout, due to increasing violence, decline in musical melodic quality, and rise in video piracy, leading to middle-class family audiences abandoning theaters. qayamat se qayamat tak's blend of youthfulness, wholesome entertainment, emotional quotients and strong melodies is credited with luring family audiences back to the big screen. the film is credited with having "reinvented the romantic musical genre" in bollywood. chintamani credits it as one of the most important films of the last three decades. it was a milestone in the history of hindi cinema, setting the template for bollywood musical romance films that defined hindi cinema in the 1990s.


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
qayamat se qayamat tak at imdb