queen of hearts (danish: dronningen) is a 2019 danish drama film directed by may el-toukhy, and starring trine dyrholm, and gustav lindh. it was selected as the danish entry for the best international feature film at the 92nd academy awards, but it was not nominated. the film won the 2019 nordic council film prize.


== plot ==
anne is a lawyer working on the prosecution of a rape case. she is married to a physician, peter, and they have two daughters, frida and fanny. peter's teenage son from his past marriage is gustav, who lives in sweden with his mother rebecca. the family plans for gustav to move in with anne and peter. gustav arrives but begins to conflict with peter, pushing for the right to move out on his own despite being a minor. one day, anne returns home to find there has been a break-in and burglary. the incident is reported to the police, but afterwards anne finds an item in gustav's laundry that was in her bag, stolen during the break-in. she realizes he was responsible for the robbery and confronts gustav with the evidence. however, anne promises to keep the matter a secret if gustav does his part in the household. time passes and one night, gustav brings his girlfriend amanda home. anne hears the couple having sex and is aroused.
peter and anne entertain guests on their balcony, but anne leaves the group to take gustav to a bar. there, she kisses him. later, she enters his bedroom and the two have sex. the two begin a sexual relationship; during which, gustav interviews anne, asking her various questions including about her first sexual relationship. anne says it was with someone she should not have had sex with, but she does not want to talk about it. the family celebrates frida and fanny's birthday. when anne and gustav step away, gustav kisses her. a guest, anne's sister lina, witnesses the encounter and upset, leaves the party. anne frets lina will tell peter, and breaks off her relationship with gustav.
gustav and peter leave to spend time at their cabin; peter returns and tells anne that gustav wants to go to a boarding school, and gustav and anne had an affair. anne angrily denies the accusation, saying gustav hates her for ending peter and rebecca's marriage. she also tells peter gustav was responsible for the burglary. anne, peter and gustav then sit down together, where anne continues to deny the affair. gustav threatens to report anne for the affair, but she replies he is not a credible witness. gustav is kicked out of the house but later goes missing from his school. a hunter discovers gustav's body near the cabin, where he froze to death.


== cast ==
trine dyrholm as anne
gustav lindh as gustav
magnus krepper as peter
preben kristensen as erik


== reception ==
on rotten tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 97% based on 29 reviews. especially dyrholm's performance was praised. guy lodge of variety magazine called it "[a] sleek, engrossing melodrama..."
the film won nine robert awards, including best danish film. it also won four bodil awards, including best danish film.


== see also ==
list of submissions to the 92nd academy awards for best international feature film
list of danish submissions for the academy award for best international feature film


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
queen of hearts at imdb