raffles is a 1939 american crime comedy film starring david niven and olivia de havilland, and is one of several film adaptations of an 1899 short story collection by e. w. hornung, the amateur cracksman.
sidney howard was given credit as co-author of the screenplay with john van druten, due to his having been the writer of the 1930 version. howard had died four months prior to the release of this film. f. scott fitzgerald may also have worked on the script, but this is unconfirmed.


== plot ==
a.j. raffles, the celebrated cricketer, is welcomed in the parlours and country estates of high society. this circumstance he uses to his advantage in his secret career as "the amateur cracksman", a master burglar and safecracker who remains always one step ahead of scotland yard. an old school friend, bunny manders, reintroduces raffles to his sister, gwen, with whom raffles had been infatuated a decade ago. raffles falls in love with her all over again, and she with him. when bunny confides a crushing gambling debt over which he is considering suicide, raffles assures him the money can be obtained. he plans to accept a weekend invitation to the country house of lord and lady melrose; lady melrose's famous jewelry can easily solve bunny's problem. however, another guest is inspector mackenzie incognito, who strongly suspects raffles of being the cracksman. raffles plots to frame a petty criminal with the theft, but keep the jewelry, for himself.


== cast ==
david niven as a.j. raffles
olivia de havilland as gwen manders
dame may whitty as kitty, lady melrose
dudley digges as inspector mackenzie
douglas walton as bunny manders
e. e. clive as barraclough
lionel pape as george, lord melrose
peter godfrey as harry crawshay
gilbert emery as bingham
margaret seddon as maud holden
leyland hodgson as bobby
leonard carey as bingham's secretary (uncredited)
james finlayson as hansom cab driver (uncredited)
gibson gowland as villager (uncredited)


== in popular culture ==
john barrymore portrayed raffles in the film raffles, the amateur cracksman (1917). ronald colman played the part thirteen years later in raffles.
the main character is parodied in the simpsons episode "homer the vigilante" as cat burglar molloy.


== references ==


== external links ==
raffles at imdb
raffles at the tcm movie database
raffles at allmovie
raffles at the tcm movie database
raffles at the american film institute catalog