ragada (transl.fight) is a 2010 indian telugu-language action film directed by veeru potla and produced by d. siva prasad reddy. it stars nagarjuna, anushka shetty, and priyamani in lead roles, with the music composed by s. thaman. the film revolves around satya, a village rowdy who arrives in the city to earn money and willingly participates in a fight between two rivals that brings him to their attention.
ragada was released theatrically on 24 december 2010. in 2011, it was dubbed into tamil as vambu. a hindi dubbed version under the original title was also released the same year by aditya music.


== plot ==
the movie starts with devudu (tanikella bharani) trying to kill an innocent man, who is against peddanna (pradeep rawat). devudu is killed by jairam, who is one of peddanna's followers. peddanna is the biggest goon in all of ap, and he has three major followers who murder people for him. these followers are jairam, bhagavan (supreeth), and nanda (sushant singh). the next scene introduces satya reddy (akkineni nagarjuna), getting off a truck and getting involved in a fight, which is between gk (dev gill) and peddanna. satya helps gk, who makes him his partner. satya only works for money. gk's love, sirisha (anushka shetty) falls in love with satya. satya sees ashtalakshmi (priyamani) being chased by rowdies. satya saves her. ashtalakshmi and her brahmin family start living with satya for a few days.
satya tells a good plan to gk, to fight peddanna. in one fight, jairam captures sirisha, and satya saves her by killing jairam. ashtalakshmi also loves satya. sirisha meets a tattooed friend in pub which satya notices. in a restaurant during lunch with sirisha and ashtalakshmi, satya is attacked by bhagavan's henchmen. satya goes to bhagavan's house and kills him and his son, which makes peddanna his enemy.
the movie jumps to satya's flashback, where they find out that he is an orphan, taken into care by a loving doctor, who is like mother teresa. the people of this city, kadapa, worship her like a god. devendra (sathya prakash), a political campaigner and brother of peddanna, kidnap the doctor's daughter to make sure that she tells everyone to vote for him, to which she does not do. satya enters on cue and beats up devendra's men. it is later found out that he has to get 72 crores to keep the doctor's hospital running, as devendra's father had donated the land to the hospital. peddanna kills the doctor by his three goons as satya has beaten his brother. so, to get the money and to take revenge against the goons who killed the doctor, satya joins gk.
at this time, satya is back in his house and is dealing with ashtalakshmi's parents, who are weeping uncontrollably. he finds out that peddanna's men long ago kidnapped ashtalakshmi's elder brother. satya goes to the headquarters where her brother is held and frees him. then, he finds out that ashtalakshmi is not who she says she is, and actually robbed 180 crores from peddanna with the help of her brother.
ashtalakshmi and her brother run away to bangkok. satya finds out and takes sirisha with her to bangkok. it is revealed that ashtalakshmi does not have money, sirisha and ashtalakshmi are friends, and ashtalakshmi is the same tattooed girl from the pub. satya reveals to them that he knew about their plan from the start and that he has the 180 crores. satya is actually here to kill nanda as satya knew that ashtalakshmi's brother will follow nanda to get his share of money. satya kills nanda and returns to india. peddanna kidnaps satya's younger sister and tries to kill and bury her. satya kills peddhanna, saves the hospital, and gets his revenge.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by s. thaman and released by aditya music. the audio was launched on 29 november 2010 amidst the fans at the shilpa kala vedika in hyderabad. almost all the members of akkineni family, including akkineni nageswara rao, nagarjuna, naga chaitanya, akhil, sumanth, and sushanth, besides hundreds of fans, attended the function. akkineni unveiled the audio cd and handed over the first piece to nagarjuna.
all tracks are written by ramajogayya sastry.


== reception ==
ragada received generally mixed reviews from critics.
andhra box office gave the film 3.25 stars out of 5 and called it a treat for nagarjuna's fans, while praising the action sequences, comedy, songs, punch dialogues and the direction but criticizing nagarjuna's dance and the predictable storyline.123telugu similarly gave the film 3.25 stars out of 5 and praised nagarjuna's performance, brahmanandam's comedy, the technical aspects and the presence of multiple villains while criticizing the second half and the climax. idlebrain.com gave it 3 stars out of 5, similarly praising nagarjuna's performance and anushka's acting without the makeup along with the twists in the second half, the action sequences and the technical aspects, while criticizing the lack of story in the first half and the presence of multiple villains. greatandhra also gave it 3 stars out of 5 and praised nagarjuna's performance, glamour quotient, the opening fight sequence and presentation of songs, but criticized the second half, the placement of songs, jerks in the editing and lack of depth in the characterization of villains.on the other hand, rediff.com gave it 2.5 stars out of 5 and praised nagarjuna's performance and called the film worth the money while also labelling it formulaic. fullhyd gave it 1.5 stars out of 5, praising brahmanandam's comedy while criticizing the violence and placement of songs.


== box office ==
ragada collected 8.48 crores in the opening week. in the second week, the collections amounted to 11.54 crores. the total collections in the fourth week amounted to 15.27 crores and the total collections including the overseas gross were equal to 17.15 crores.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
ragada at imdb