raggedy ann & andy: a musical adventure is a 1977 american live-action/animated musical fantasy film directed by richard williams, produced by the bobbs-merrill company, and released theatrically by 20th century fox. a 1941 short film had previously featured the raggedy ann and andy characters created by johnny gruelle.


== plot ==
a little girl named marcella returns home from school one day and immediately rushes upstairs to her nursery playroom to put away raggedy ann, her favorite doll. when marcella leaves, the various toys in the playroom come to life, and raggedy ann tells them of the wonders of the outside world ("what do i see?"). she then shares the news that it is marcella's seventh birthday, and the toys notice a large package in the corner, presumably a present for her. ann's brother raggedy andy is trapped under the package, and, after being freed, complains about the  feminine nature of the nursery ("no girl's toy"). marcella opens the present to reveal a beautiful bisque doll from france named babette. raggedy ann leads the toys in welcoming babette to their nursery ("rag dolly"), but she is too homesick for paris to accept their greeting ("poor babette"). 
trouble begins when captain contagious, a ceramic pirate who lives in a snow globe, notices babette and immediately becomes smitten ("a miracle"). after tricking raggedy ann into freeing him, he kidnaps the french doll and leaps out the nursery window with his crew ("the abduction/yo ho!"). raggedy ann decides to rescue babette, with andy volunteering to accompany her. they leave the playroom and enter the woods, where they reaffirm their courage and love for one another while exploring ("candy hearts and paper flowers"). as the dolls travel, they come across the camel with the wrinkled knees, a blue stuffed animal who has been abandoned by his previous owners ("blue"). the camel admits that he longs for a home of his own, and raggedy ann promises that once they find babette, he may return with them. the prospect of a home sends the camel into a trance, and he rushes off a cliff with the dolls in tow. they find themselves in the taffy pit, where an enormous, sentient blob of candy known only as the greedy lives. the greedy explains that, despite endlessly eating the various sweets that compose his body, he never feels satisfied, as he lacks a "sweetheart" ("i never get enough"). he thus attempts to take the candy heart sewn inside of raggedy ann, but the toys successfully escape his lair and continue their journey.
the trio next encounter the obnoxious sir leonard looney, a knight with a penchant for mean-spirited practical jokes. looney begins chasing after the toys to play more tricks on them ("i love you") and ends up luring them into looney land, a surreal realm full of bizarre architecture and giggling, robotic inhabitants. while trying to avoid the knight, ann, andy, and the camel wander into the throne room of king koo koo, looney land's extremely diminutive ruler. koo koo laments his tiny stature ("it's not easy being king") and explains that the only way he can grow is by laughing at the misfortune and suffering of others. he thus intends to keep the toys his prisoners forever, so they can be subjected to nasty pranks and make him larger permanently. the dolls escape this fate by triggering a large fight with cream pies, then slipping away and fleeing looney land in a boat. the furious king koo koo follows them with the aid of an enormous sea monster named gazooks.
while sailing, ann, andy, and the camel notice contagious's pirate ship and eagerly board, only to discover that babette has staged a mutiny and made herself the new captain to return to paris ("hooray for me!") while imprisoning contagious in the galley with only his pet parrot queasy for company ("you're my friend"). when ann tries to tell babette that she must go back to marcella, the french doll becomes enraged and has the trio tied to the mast. meanwhile, queasy successfully unlocks contagious's shackles, and he returns above deck, freeing the other dolls and pledging his love for babette. before she can respond, king koo koo and gazooks attack the ship and seize all but ann, babette, and queasy to subject them to tickle torture, making the monarch swell to mammoth proportions. babette sees that her selfishness has endangered everyone and begs forgiveness, only for her and ann to be captured as well. the dolls realize that king koo koo's literally-inflated ego is "full of hot air" and tell queasy to pop him, which creates a massive explosion that sends them spiraling through space.
the next morning, marcella discovers the dolls and toys lying among the leaves in her backyard, having been presumably blown back there by the force of koo koo's demise. she returns all but the camel to the nursery, where babette apologizes for her actions and accepts both ann's offer of friendship and contagious's affections. the heroes are happy to be back in the playroom ("home"), and ann notices the camel gazing at them through the window. the dolls eagerly welcome him to their family and express joy at being together once more ("candy hearts and paper flowers reprise"). the next day, marcella finds the camel among the dolls and, after a moment's confusion, hugs him tightly, accepting him as her newest friend.


== cast ==
claire williams as marcella
joe raposo (uncredited) as the bus drivervoicesdidi conn as raggedy ann
animated by tissa david
mark baker as raggedy andy
mason adams as grandpa
animated by john bruno
allen swift as maxi-fixit
animated by spencer peel
hetty galen as susie pincushion
animated by spencer peel
sheldon harnick as barney beanbag / socko
socko was animated by crystal russell
ardyth kaiser as topsy
animated by spencer peel
margery gray and lynne stuart as the twin pennies
niki flacks as babette
animated by hal ambro
george s. irving as captain contagious (the captain)
animated by charlie downs
arnold stang as queasy
animated by art vitello
fred stuthman as the camel with the wrinkled knees
animated by art babbitt
joe silver as the greedy
animated by emery hawkins
alan sues as sir leonard loony (the loony knight)
animated by john kimball
marty brill as king koo koo
animated by gerry chiniquy
paul dooley as gazooks
animated by george bakes


== soundtrack ==
raggedy ann & andy: a musical adventure soundtrack was released on vinyl, cassette tape and 8-track tape by columbia records in 1977.
side 1:

"main title"  rag dolly
"where'd you go?"  twin penny dolls
"i look, and what do i see?"  raggedy ann and the dolls in the nursery
"i'm no girl's toy"  raggedy andy and the dolls in the nursery
"rag dolly"  raggedy ann, raggedy andy and the dolls in the nursery
"poor babette"  babette
"a miracle"  captain and the parrot
"the abduction & yo-ho!"  captain, parrot and the pirates
"really scary!" - twin penny dolls
"candy hearts and paper flowers"  raggedy ann and raggedy andyside 2:

"blue"  the camel
"camel's mirage"  the camel and the camels in the sky
"i never get enough"  the greedy
"i love you"  the loony knight
"hail to our glorious king!"  the loonies
"it's not easy being king"  king koo koo
"hooray for me!"  babette and the pirates
"you're my friend"  captain and the parrot
"the plot thickens"  the entire cast and gazooks
"the tickling and the last laugh"  the king, et al.
"home"  raggedy ann, raggedy andy, the camel, et al.


== production ==
the bobbs-merrill company approached richard williams to produce a animated film based on raggedy ann. williams pitched the idea to universal pictures and warner bros, but they declined. williams pursued 20th century fox president alan ladd jr. to finance the film. abe levitow was originally attached to direct the film with williams serving only as animation supervisor. however, when levitow became ill and eventually died, williams reluctantly decided to replace him as director. he clashed with the producers over many aspects of the film, including the multitude of musical numbers and weak character development. despite his misgivings the producers forbade him to cut a single scene. eventually, like many of his other projects, the movie went over time and budget, and williams was removed at the end so the film could be released on time. his name remained on the finished product. besides williams, who by this time had already received a bafta award, an emmy award, and an oscar for his work in animation, other talented animators also were enlisted. hal ambro and art babbitt from disney, and looney tunes/merrie melodies animator gerry chiniquy also worked on the film. animators worked from home; there wasn't a central studio like most animated feature films. the music was composed by joe raposo, the longtime musical director of sesame street and the electric company.
tissa david became one of the first women to animate a leading character in a major film when she designed and animated raggedy ann for the project. in a 1977 interview, david told the new york times that she designed the raggedy ann character as "a plain jane with a heart of candy  and she's all female."drawings from this film were used to test "videocel", an early yet innovative cgi system developed by computer creations corp.


== artists ==
animators: hal ambro, cosmo anzilotti, art babbitt, george bakes, warren batchelder, john bruno, gerry chiniquy, corny cole, doug crane, ray dasilva, tissa david, chuck downs, emery hawkins, fred hellmich, john kimball, chrystal klabunde, grim natwick, spencer peel, gerald potterton, willis pyle, tom roth, jack schnerk, irven spence, art vitello
assistant animators: david block, loren bowie, michelle clay, john celestri, sheldon cohen, james a. davis, gerry dvorak, glenn entis, brad frost, jay jacoby, jeffrey gatrall, john r. gaug, eric goldberg, leslie gorin, murad gumen, judith hans, dan haskett, patricia hoyt, helen komar, susan kroyer, judy levitow, jim logan, karen marjoribanks, marlene robinson may, carol millican, jack mongovan, alissa myerson, lester pegues jr., karen peterson, kevin petrilak, barney posner, mitch rochon, louis scarborough, jr., tom sito, michael sporn, mary szilagyi, peggy tonkonogy, duane ullrich, chung yuan (james) wang, amanda wilson


== reception ==
despite this considerable amount of talent, raggedy ann & andy: a musical adventure received mixed reviews. many critics found the movie hard to watch, complaining that the plot moved too slowly, had little focus, and was burdened by too many musical numbers. many of the characters were considered too disturbing for children, but the settings and rest of the film's concepts was praised. there is also some adult humor and subtext, mainly in captain contagious, as his moustache grows erect and he performs pelvic thrusts when he first sees the character of babette. raggedy ann and andy have very little character development; they move from place to place meeting strange characters, but the focus is always on the new character, and they essentially just move the plot forward. some viewers were also confused over whether ann and andy were supposed to be siblings or romantic partners, especially after andy sings what is basically a love song to ann. (in other works such as the 1941 short film, however, the pair are clearly sweethearts, and even marry at the end.) according to halliwell's film guide, "[in this] attractive fully animated cartoon feature [...] only the central story is lacking in pace and humor."


== release ==
after its short initial box office run, the film saw little to no distribution with the exception of airing on showtime in may, 1978 and one night in 1979 on cbs and later a release on the long defunct rca ced videodisc system. in the early 1980s the film was released on vhs by cbs video. it did receive a considerable amount of play on the disney channel during the late 1980s and early 1990s, as well as on the nickelodeon show special delivery.
"blue" was featured on a season 3 episode of the muppet show with helen reddy and the song sequence from the film was also featured on an episode of the big blue marble and the special, sing! sesame street remembers the music of joe raposo. the song "i'm home" was also featured on an episode of shining time station in which conn co-starred later in her career and for which raposo provided the theme song and some incidental music just before his death. nevertheless, the film has not been shown on television for many years. it was released on video by cbs/fox video (through their playhouse video imprint) in the late 1980s.
currently, viacomcbs through paramount pictures owns the rights to the film via its simon & schuster subsidiary, who owns the rights to the raggedy ann and andy characters.


== stage adaptations ==
the film has been adapted for the stage twice.
in 1981, screenwriter patricia thackray reworked the story for raggedy ann & andy, a play which is available to license for performances at schools and community theatres. there are many deviations in this version, most notably there are only two sets and prince leonard-the-looney-hearted (known as sir leonard looney in the film) replaces the captain.
in 1984, songwriter joe raposo and playwright william gibson crafted a much darker variation of the story, first called raggedy ann and then briefly retitled rag dolly. raposo retained two songs from the film (rag dolly and blue) and reworked the opening title theme into a song called gingham and yarn. the plot was completely different and follows the dying young marcella, who goes on a journey with raggedy ann and her friends to meet the doll doctor, who can mend her broken heart. this version ran in three theatres (including one in moscow) before landing with a thud on broadway in 1986.


== see also ==

list of animated feature-length films
list of 20th century studios theatrical animated feature films


== references ==

canemaker, john (1977). the animated raggedy ann & andy. isbn 0-672-52329-9. indianapolis/new york city: bobbs-merrill. accessed march 7, 2008.


== external links ==
raggedy ann & andy: a musical adventure at imdb
raggedy ann & andy: a musical adventure at the big cartoon database
raggedy ann & andy: a musical adventure at rotten tomatoes
raggedy ann & andy: a musical adventure at allmovie
a detailed review at the unknown movies site