raja huli is a 2013 indian kannada-language comedy-drama film directed by guru deshpande and written by s. r. prabhakaran. produced by k. manju's home production, the film stars yash and meghana raj in the lead roles. the soundtrack and score for the film is composed by hamsalekha  the film, which made its theatrical release on 1 november 2013, co-inciding with the kannada rajyotsava festival became a commercial hit at the box office, becoming yash's 3rd consecutive hit after drama and googly. the movie is a remake of 2012 tamil movie sundarapandian.


== plot ==
raja huli (yash) is the son of a rich landlord in mandya, leads a happy life and spends all time with his friends. raja huli ensures that he is always of some help to his friends. one day, he goes to ensure that his friend's love is conveyed to a girl kaveri (meghana raj), who happens to be his ex-flame. as it happens, she falls in love with raja huli again. but trouble begins here. a murder happens and the blame falls on raja huli and then some twist and turns that forms the climax.


== cast ==
yash as raja huli 
meghana raj as kaveri
harsha as moni
chikkanna as chikka
charan raj
vasishta n. simha as jagga
mithra as andravi
ashwini as mayuri
manu
shashikala
m. n. lakshmi devi as a grandmother of rajahuli
sudha belawadi as kaveri's mother
nishchitha gowda
hamsa
soujanya
girish shivanna as cheluvaraj
aruna balraj as mother of rajahuli
jadesh kumar
prakash heggodu
vijay koundinya
manju mandavya as bharatha
raj kumar
jayaram
gajendra rao
gandasi nagaraj


== soundtrack ==
hamsalekha composed the music for the film and the soundtracks, also writing the lyrics for four soundtracks. lyrics for the soundtrack "falling in love" was penned by yogaraj bhat. the album has six soundtracks.


== box office ==
raja huli was released on 1 november 2013, the day of kannada rajyotsava and got a fantastic opening at the box office upon release. the film took the box office by storm despite facing competition from a major bollywood release krrish 3. according to trade reports, collections of raja huli was better than krrish 3 and tamil flick arrambam at bangalore box office. the film also did very good business on weekdays and collected approximately 5 crore nett and 8 crore gross at the box office in the first week. the movie, which was made with a budget of 6 crore, recovered its production cost in just seven days. raja huli went on to complete 119 days of successful run and collected a total of 30 crore and was performed fairly well at the box-office. raja huli also became yash's third consecutive success after drama and googly,


== references ==


== external links ==
raja huli at imdb