rajadhi raja (english:king of kings) is a 2009 tamil action comedy masala film written and directed by sakthi chidambaram and produced by radha sakthi chidambaram. it stars lawrence raghavendra, mumtaj, snigdha akolkar, kamna jethmalani, meenakshi, and karunas. the film was released on 15 may 2009 and received a huge negative response.


== plot ==
raja (raghava lawrence) is a native of coutrallam. tragedy strikes his adolescent life when his father loses his hand when a doctor in an inebriated condition operates on him. the doctor fearing legal consequences bribes the local police to take care of the issue. young raja witnesses police brutality on his father causing his father's health to deteriorate. on his deathbed, his father gets a promise from raja that he would make his three brothers into a cop, lawyer, and doctor. raja realises his mission, and stops his studies to earn money to make his brothers into what he promised.
the brothers are provided shelter and food by a local elderly woman (paravai muniyamma) whom raja affectionately calls as paati. she has a granddaughter lakshmi (neelima rani), whom raja considers as his own sister.
now raja in his adulthood makes ends meet as a bus driver, while his three brothers become doctor, policeman and lawyer as per his father's wish.
one day, his sister shows disinterest in going to college and complains about eve-teasing. raja dismisses the claim and asks her to attend. she convinces him to come with her. on seeing her a group of college men start ogling her. raja walks up to them, and suggests them to ogle at voluptuous women like nayanthara and leave not so good looking girls like his sister alone.
the youths ignoring his words, remarks that raja's sister indeed has a curvy hourglass figure and proceeds to molest her. enraged by this raja fights and chases them away warning others to stay away from his sister.
raja is then kidnapped by thangapazham (meenakshi) while he is asleep by a group of woman she controls. she expresses her lust over raja and pronounces that she will get him to do what she says. raja escapes from her while she's distracted. thangapazham is then kidnapped by krishnamoorthy (karunas) who inturn expresses his lust over thangapazham which she blatantly ignores.
meanwhile shailja (mumtaj), a woman gangster turned politician who openly admits to having slept her way to become a minister, is seen beating up a cop for not falling on her feet. eventually she murders him and mocks at his dead body for falling on her feet after death.
thangapazham again woos raja this time asking him to massage her. raja reluctantly agrees and takes her to a secluded place where he oil massages the half naked woman. on seeing his woman of interest with another man, krishnamurthy gets aroused and jealous at the same time.
during a college function lakshmi and shailaja get into an altercation. shailaja takes lakshmi and beats her. raja comes to his sister's rescue beating up goons. he then proceeds to remove shailaja's sari to humiliate her and forces her followers to sexually assault her. when a follower remarks she's like a sister, raja mentions that after ogling shailaja's body from top to bottom for so long, it was time they cut their dirty imaginations and proceed to perform real actions. he pushes some of them towards her and takes few pictures while they fall on her.
later, raja is once again kidnapped by thangapazham, this time wearing slinky clothes to arouse raja. she proceeds to threaten raja and forces him to measure her body with a tape. he reluctantly measure her waist and hips. when measuring her bust while raja initially tries to look away, thangapazham forces him to see her while doing so to arouse him. he measures and is shocked at the size. thangapazham remarks that two inches have increased and that it's fine.
raja then gets into a local jallikattu competition which he eventually wins. the organizer, a local village chief announces that raja will wed his daughter. he pulls his friend krishna murthy along in this mess. at the wedding raja is desperate to escape but unable to do so. thangapazham enters and stops the wedding by throwing a hand grenade in the crowd causing people to run.
after this, lakshmi gets sick and is admitted into one of the hospitals run by raja's brother. however turning greedy he demands money and gets into a fight with paati. he then brutally murders the sister out of rage and the old woman to eliminate a possible eyewitness. it is revealed that all three brothers are corrupt and accomplices of shailaja.
after learning this, raja swears an oath to eliminate the three brothers by betraying them while acting to be on their side.
when spying on his brothers he meets with nikhita (snigdha akolkar), a girl who admires raja for his character. it is revealed that she is the sister of the dreaded shailaja.
the lawyer brother, during his visit to a local school, wishes to sexually abuse a girl. he then eventually sedates and proceeds to abuse her. raja wearing a helmet enters and beats the brother vigorously, saving the girl. his brother can't see the face of the assaulter.
enters nurse namitha (kamna jethmalani),a buxom woman ogled by many men in the hospital. raja eventually ends up befriending her, when he tries to perform a stint against his brother to collect evidences.
raja then witnesses his police brother brutally stir up a riot and intentionally kill an innocent civilian using a sledgehammer brutally smashing the skull. at night, when the police officer pairs up with a high-class prostitute babilona for sex in his police vehicle, raja ties the vehicle and traps them inside using a crane. he gets caught red-handed the next morning and is suspended from office.
the three brothers initially suspect raja, but he manipulates them into believing that he's innocent. the doctor brother is a pervert who keeps camera inside the nurses' dressing room and watching them change their clothes in his laptop on hd quality. watching one such nurse remove her dress, he's called for work. using this opportunity raja enters and breaks the camera, stealing the doctor's laptop for evidence. he beats the doctor viciously.
later knowing about her sister and his friendship, shailaja orders her goons to beat up raja. he beats them and shows that he is unbeatable. he then proceeds to slap shailaja in her butt, mocking her in the process. he then asks nikita to slap her sister shailaja using her footwear, in order for him to love her, which she happily does.
during an award ceremony for his doctor brother, raja blackmails using the previous evidences he gathered, forcing him to agree and announce infront of the crowd that he will perform 100 heart surgeries for free.
shailaja later enters the brothers home for a meet. fearing recognition raja masks his face with cream and mimicks a feminine voice. failing to recognise him, she has a quick convo with raja. raja then asks shailaja to adjust her sari, mocking that she is exposing her assets.
during a visit to a temple, shailaja is in her caravan travelling. the caravan is abducted and taken control by raja and krishna murthy. he then remarks that his lover, shailaja's sister is a little thin while shailaja on the other hand is a buxom woman, who is naturally arousing to men. he then forces shailaja to wear slinky clothes using an evidence of her murdering a temple official. she agrees out of fear, now all of her thighs exposed, a shy shailaja reluctantly gets down. on seeing her in such skimpy clothes on a temple occasion people get angry and start riots. making her eventually lose her minister position.
angered she returns to her old gangster form and plots to kill raja once and for all after learning he is the brother of her accomplices through a news clip. the brothers fake their death to lure raja, who is then left for dead. he is saved by krishna murthy and nikita. he stops the bad guys beating every one of them to death. finally it is shown that after jail raja married nikitha with the help of thangapazham.


== cast ==


== production ==
after sandai, sakthi chidambaram announced his next project called rajathi raja, the title derived from rajinikanth's 1989 film of the same name. sakthi has acquired the rights of title from pavalar creations, production company of music composer ilayaraja which produced the original film. the film was launched in july 2008 at avm studios.snigdha akolkar was chosen for a role after kajal aggarwal, pooja, sandhya, namitha, and lakshmi rai all pulled out of the film. actress sameksha's role was removed as the length of the film was getting too long. meenakshi of karuppusamy kuththagaithaarar and kamna jethmalani of idhaya thirudan were selected as the other heroines, while mumtaj was selected to play a negative role and also dubbed her voice for the first time, thus making her comeback.


== soundtrack ==
initially, dhina was selected as the composer, but he was removed and was replaced by comedian karunas, who made his debut as music director in this film. paul jacob, a sri lankan composer who composed for films like thalaimagan and kizhakku kadalkarai salai, was another composer. the lyrics for all songs were written by director perarasu. the audio was released on 11 may 2009.

"kandha kadambha kathiresa" - sam p. keerthan
"elanthapazham (remix)" - shakthisree gopalan, dinesh
"yaaro oruthi" - madhu balakrishnan, deepa
"kathirikaa" - karunas, grace
"aandipatti arasampatti" - t. rajender, pop shalini


== critical reception ==
nowrunning wrote: "rajaathi raja is such a bad film that the sequence of events in the movie would fail to convince even a three-year-old child". behindwoods wrote:"overall, rajadhi raja is a tale of gross underestimation of audiences tastes. there is a very fine line between being commercial and being crass. unfortunately, shakthi chidambaram finds himself on the wrong side of the line this time". rediff wrote:"for sheer, mind-numbing crudity, there's no equal to rajadhi raja". sify wrote:"sakthi chidambarams rajadhi raja is the crudest masala movie seen in recent times".


== controversies ==
after the release, chidambaram lashed out at actress suhasini for giving negative reviews against his film.


== references ==


== external links ==
rajadhi raja profile at poochandi