raju chacha (english: raju uncle) is a 2000 indian bollywood family action film directed by anil devgan, released on 20 december 2000. the film stars ajay devgn, kajol and rishi kapoor in the lead roles. raju chacha was devgn's first attempt as a producer.


== plot ==
siddhant rai is a wealthy architect, living a comfortable lifestyle with his three children rohit, rahul and rani. also living with them is their butler banky bihari chaturdevi also known as b.b.c.. because they have no mother, siddhant has arranged for many governesses or teachers to take care of them, but the children always drive any of these governesses and teachers away. siddhant soon decides to send his children to boarding school but changes his mind when b.b.c. reminds him that when siddhant threw his younger brother out of the house, he never came back again. siddhant, however, arranges for another governess.
meanwhile, a con man named shekhar and his friend jadu have just robbed a bank and are on the run from police. shekhar comes across the beautiful anna who is to be the governess of the rai children. shekhar tries to woo anna with no success. shekhar and jadu follow anna to the rai household; shekhar now believes he has met a rich girl and believes he has hit the jackpot. although the children initially try and drive anna away, they come to accept her as an older sister. shekhar continues to woo anna and she eventually returns his feelings. with siddhant's permission, the two get married. on the wedding day, siddhant learns that shekhar is a criminal: he stole the wedding rings and only married anna to gain siddhant's wealth. shekhar is sent to prison and anna decides to leave the house.
siddhant is soon killed in a car accident. the children are placed under the care of their cruel maternal uncles, who only have interest in siddhant's fortune. the children are in a terrible situation the court decides that they need to be separated. just as the magistrate intends to sign their adoption papers, a young man comes in and claims that he is rajit rai, siddhant's younger brother the man is none other than shekhar. the magistrate believes that the man is truly siddhant's brother, so refuses to sign the adoption papers, however, he sets a date for a hearing in which the appropriate guardian shall be granted custody of the rai children. the children are at first unhappy to have shekhar back in their lives however, b.b.c. and jadu explain that shekhar is the only one who can help the children. the children warm up to their new 'raj chacha.' anna soon returns to the house and is angry to see shekhar again as she believes he is attempting to rob the children.
problems arise when another man enters the house and says that he is rajit rai. the uncles are now confused as this man looks and acts more like the real rajit rai. shekhar makes a deal with themif they prove to the magistrate that shekhar is the real raju chacha, he shall only take 25 percent of the share. the uncles agree but soon learn that shekhar tricked them and that the 'real' raju chacha they met is none other than a fellow conman of shekhar's. the relatives have driven away. anna reconciles with shekhar when she learns his real intentions. anna and shekhar start to look after the children.
however, their happiness is short-lived when the relatives return and expose shekhar, who is sent back to jail. meanwhile, the children are shocked to learn that their father was killed by their relatives, all for his money. the children's lives are again in danger until shekhar breaks out of prison and kills the relatives in the same way that killed siddhant. shekhar and anna get married and are given custody of the three children. however, they are still on the lookout for the real raju chacha.


== cast ==
ajay devgan as shekhar/rajit rai aka raju chacha
kajol as anna/sanjana
rishi kapoor as siddhant rai
sanjay dutt as gafoor (special appearance)
sakshi sem as rani rai
kinshuk vaidya as rahul rai
harsh lunia as rohit rai
johnny lever as jaddu
tiku talsania as banky bihari chaturdevi (b.b.c.)
govind namdeo as vikram sinha
pramod moutho as prabhakar sinha
smita jaykar as mother superior
shahbaz khan (actor) as babu
anil nagrath as magistrate
kaivalya chheda as daddu, pramods son


== production ==
manisha koirala was signed for the lead role, but opted out due to her commitments to other films. ajay devgn approached sunny deol to play a special appearance as real raju chacha in the film, but sunny was busy with his other projects so ajay decided to scrap the role from the film.


== release ==
raju chacha premiered at the academy of motion picture arts and sciences' theatres in the united states on 28 december 2000 and was released worldwide on the next day.


== awards ==


=== star screen awards ===
wonbest special effectsnominatedbest action director - jaisingh nijjar
best art direction - nitin chandrakant desai


== music ==
the soundtrack of the film contains 7 songs. the music is composed by jatin-lalit, with lyrics authored by anand bakshi


== references ==

1	^ bollywood hungama. "raju chacha". bollywoodhungama.com. retrieved 31 december 2000.


== external links ==
raju chacha at imdb