ram lakhan is a 1989 indian hindi-language masala film. it was produced and directed by subhash ghai and had an ensemble cast, including anil kapoor, jackie shroff, madhuri dixit, dimple kapadia, raakhee, amrish puri, paresh rawal and anupam kher. director subhash ghai had initially offered the music to r.d. burman. but after recording 2 songs, he immediately shifted the task to laxmikant pyarelal. the film was a huge box office blockbuster of its time and was loved by audiences. the film is considered a classic and is considered to be ghai's best work. anil kapoor's character lakhan was much loved by audiences and is considered to be one of his best performances. the film is also one of the most popular and successful films of the duo anil kapoor and jackie shroff, who share great on screen chemistry. the film featured the much loved jodi of anil kapoor and madhuri dixit and was one of their most memorable films together.ram lakhan was the second highest-grossing bollywood film of 1989.


== plot ==
sharda is happily married in a rich aristocratic household to thakur pratap singh and is the mother to two young boys. thakur pratap singh's father shows mercy to his nephews bhishamber and bhanu after they serve jail time for siphoning the family wealth and stealing within the household and whiling away their time - drinking and gambling. thakur sr. is tricked into signing a will that deprives his son, daughter-in-law and two children from the ancestral wealth and the right to even live in the manor's premises.
thakur senior is then killed off in a car bomb and when thakur pratap singh refuses to bow down to cruel bhishamber nath after finding out their master plan and after his wife is humiliated publicly by then, he is severely beaten up, stabbed brutally, and left on a nearby railway track to be cut to pieces by the next passing train, leaving behind his widowed wife sharda, and two young sons, ram and lakhan. sharda, who witnesses the whole scene, vows to avenge the death of her husband and hopes she will achieve this by visiting the temple every day - praying for justice. she talks about the day when her sons grow up and ultimately destroy their father's assailants, and it is then and then only that she will disperse her husband's ashes.
the evil duo bhishamber and bhanu exploit and enjoy the family's riches.
years later, ram is now the police inspector and is a major obstacle in bhishamber's illegal activities, while lakhan is the fun-loving, wanna-be quick millionaire, precocious young man, still living in his brother's shadow and mother's love for him. ram also has an affair with the commissioner's daughter, geeta and is constantly teased by his younger brother for not coming out in the open with it.
when lakhan finds out that there is a big reward for the capture and arrest of notorious gangster kesariya vilayti, he single-handedly captures him and claims the reward. thinking police work is quite simple and easy, he applies for the job, completes his training and also becomes a police inspector like his brother. he also seeks to use this to woo his childhood sweetheart radha and deal with her stingy, eccentric but easily fooled and well-meaning father deodhar shastri.
satisfied that her sons have chosen the right path, sharda goes on a religious pilgrimage to pray for their unity. when she returns, she finds that nothing is the same anymore, ram and lakhan have quarreled and no longer speak with each other based on their ideological differences and because lakhan uses his power to help smugglers and make extra money in an attempt at raising his clout so he can exact revenge against the evil bhishamber and bhanu. ram continues to live in their older family home, while lakhan has moved into a spacious bungalow, supposedly bought through bribes and black deals. while ram continues to create obstacles for bhishamber, lakhan joins bhishamber's gang and is on their payroll.
however, after lakhan is tricked by bhishamber and the ruthless, womanizing and dastardly sir john, ram has to come to terms and save his little brother and finish what was once started.


== cast ==


== track list ==
the soundtrack was composed by laxmikantpyarelal and the lyrics written by anand bakshi. the song "my name is lakhan" attained popularity.


== awards ==
35th filmfare awards
wonbest supporting actress - raakhee
best performance in a comic role - anupam kher and satish kaushiknominatedbest film - subhash ghai
best director - subhash ghai
best actor - anil kapoor
best supporting actor - satish kaushik
best music director - laxmikant pyarelal
best male playback singer - mohammed aziz - "my name is lakhan"
best female playback singer - anuradha paudwal - "tera naam liya" and -"bekadar bekhabar bewafa balma"


== references ==


== external links ==
ram lakhan at imdb