ramante edanthottam (transl.raman's garden of eden) is a 2017 indian malayalam-language romantic drama film written, produced and directed by ranjith sankar. the film stars kunchacko boban in the title role. filming began in february 2017 in kochi and vagamon. it was released in india on 12 may 2017. the film has achieved a cult status and is considered to be one of ranjith sankars best works. 


== plot ==
the movie starts with malini (anu sithara) taking a video message of herself to send to raman while driving telling that she is coming this year to visit the edanthottam. unfortunately she meets with an accident. at the hospital, her husband elvis (joju george) discovers malini is having a love affair with raman from her phone. the film flashbacks to a year back, when elvis, malini, their 10 year old daughter and their family friend salim (sreejith ravi) and family go to edanthottam in vagamon to cheer up elvis (who is a desperate producer trying to make his comeback to the movie industry).
malini is frequently insulted and looked down upon by elvis who in contrast is a good father but a hideous husband. there, malini meets the owner of the edanthottam, raman. she becomes friends with raman who is a widower(and his wife's name was also malini). they spend time together talking about their life, past, future and gels up so much that at one point they get an intuition of finding the perfect match for them. even though malini has a bad married life, she still respects the relationship she has with her husband and daughter, and keeps a friendship with raman. on the other hand, raman who was intensively in love with his late wife finds traces of her in malini. he still keeps his relationship as a friend. they share their thoughts about each others career. malini being a graceful dancer, raman advises her to start a dance school. and also invites her to come to his resort next year. malini starts a dance school with elvis's reluctant approval which will be a success. as elvis is a lazy, not so serious type person who is not dedicated to his work gets huge debts which makes them change their home once in a while. since malini starts to earn from the dance school, she looks after the houseand gets more confidence and voice in front of elvis. whereas elvis is depicted as a cheating husband who goes to prostitutes while he is out of town for work.
next year, malini approaches elvis about raman's invite. elvis agrees, but a change in schedule makes him go to chennai. malini quietly goes to ethanthottam alone where she and raman fall in the verge of love. but it is shown that they respect their personalities and decides to remain good friends. in present day, malini recovers, and is questioned by an angry elvis. malini leaves the house and sends elvis a divorce notice which shows her being an independent woman. the movie ends with malini driving a car to drop raman to the airport. it is shown that they are still continuing with their beautiful friendship and a healthy relationship. it is also said that the divorce is approved and their daughter is living with each parents separately each month.


== cast ==
kunchacko boban as raman (ram), owner of the edanthottam
anu sithara as malini, elvis' wife
joju george as elvis, malini's husband
ramesh pisharody as varmaji
muthumani as nasni, malini's friend
sreejith ravi as salim
aju varghese as shathrughnan, raman's younger brother
udaykrishna as fictional version of himself
jayasurya as himself
gokulan


== critical response ==
sify rated the film 3 out of 5 stars saying that "ramante edanthottam is a watchable entertainer". filmibeat reviewed the film to be " an impressive take on romance and relationships. watch it if you are a fan of light, feel-good cinema", while rated the film 3 out of 5 stars. lensman rated the film 3 out of 5 stars saying that " ramante edanthottam has a progressive attitude which makes it an enjoyable cinema even when the film has the limitations of being dramatic and predictable. with humor, conflicts and sensible conversations this two-hour long movie is never a boring experience".


== soundtrack ==
music was composed by bijibal, lyrics were written by santhosh varma.

"akale oru kaadinte" - shreya ghoshal
"kavitha ezhuthunnu" - sooraj santhosh
"maavilakudil" - rajalakshmy abhiram


== references ==


== external links ==
ramante edanthottam at imdb