ramaiya vastavaiya (transl.ramaiya will come) is a 2013 indian hindi-language romantic action drama film directed by prabhu deva and produced by kumar s. taurani, under tips. film stars debutant girish kumar alongside shruti haasan in lead roles. the film is a remake of prabhudeva's directorial debut film nuvvostanante nenoddantana which was itself highly inspired by maine pyar kiya.the film was released on 19 july 2013.


== plot ==
ram  is a rich city boy, born to billionaire parents and brought up in australia. on the other hand, sona is a traditional, simple desi girl from punjab who is brought up by her only brother, raghuveer. raghuveer is heartbroken when their father marries another woman and throws them out of the house, humiliating them on the way. their mother dies, and her tomb is built on the small land which they own until the zamindar tells them that it is his land, since their mother had taken a loan from the man. raghuveer volunteers to work day and night to pay off the loan as long as they do not tear down his mother's tomb. the zamindar agrees, and the local station master helps them. slowly, raghuveer and sona grow up. one day, riya, sona's best friend, comes to their house to invite sona to their house as she is getting married. riya's cousin, ram, also arrives on the same day with his mother, ashwini .
slowly, ram and sona fall in love, but ashwini does not bear it as sona is not as rich as them, and is thus not to their standards; ram is also to be married to ashwini's brother's business partner's daughter, dolly. ashwini humiliates sona as well as raghuveer, who arrives a minute before, and both are thrown out of the house after ashwini accuses them of trying to entice and trap ram. when ram learns of this, he goes to sona's house and pleads with her brother to accept him. raghuveer gives him a chance, just like he was given a chance by the zamindar when he was little. ram is tasked to take care of the cows, clean up after them and grow more crops than raghuveer by the end of the season; if he does not, ram will be thrown out of the village and can never see sona again.
the zamindar and his son are not happy as the zamindar's son wants to marry sona. with them and dolly and her father trying to get ram to lose the competition, ram has to work hard for his love, eating red chillies and rice everyday, even though he cannot bear it. through many antics from the zamindar's side and dolly's side, ram eventually proves his love for sona to raghuveer and succeeds in growing more grains. however, the zamindar's son kidnaps sona and then later tries to forcibly marry her. ram kills rao and the zamindar's son, and raghuveer brutally beats jayprakash and the zamindar. raghuveer, after realizing that ram and sona should be together, takes the blame for this and spends seven years in prison. the movie ends with raghuveer's release from prison, which is also when sona and ram get married, in everyone's presence. ashwini then accepts sona as her daughter-in-law.


== cast ==

puja banerjee (cameo)


== production ==
the filming began on 1 august 2012 in mumbai. the film had also completed a schedule in himachal pradesh. it had been announced that the film would be a remake of director prabhu deva's telugu directorial debut nuvvostanante nenoddantana.


== soundtrack ==
the first song promo of the film was released on 10 may 2013, under the title of "jeene laga hoon", sung by atif aslam and shreya ghoshal. the song was uploaded on the tips music films youtube channel (tipsmusic) and the full soundtrack was released on 15 may 2013. all songs of this album are composed by sachin - jigar and all lyrics of the songs are written by priya saraiya.
the film score is composed by sandeep shirodkar.


=== track listing ===


== release ==
the film was released on 19 july 2013. the times of india gave the film two out of five stars saying that "this one's like a pretty field decked up in celebration, but with no real harvest to show".


== references ==


== external links ==
ramaiya vastavaiya at imdb 
ramaiya vastavaiya at bollywood hungama