rama rama krishna krishna is a 2010 telugu action drama film directed by sriwass of lakshyam fame and produced by noted producer dil raju. it stars ram pothineni, arjun sarja, priya anand, and bindu madhavi, in the lead roles, whilst vineet kumar, nassar, brahmanandam, pragathi, and sayaji shinde play pivotal roles. the music was composed by m. m. keeravani with cinematography by sekhar v. joseph and editing by marthand k. venkatesh. upon the film's release on 12 may 2010, it received mixed reviews with critics mainly praising ram's and sarja's performance. it fared well at the box office.


== plot ==
the movie starts in mumbai when mafia leader ashok deva (arjun) is on an unending war with his opponent pawar (vineet kumar). deva has a cute family with two sisters sirisha and priya (priya anand), wife gauthami (gracy singh), and right-hand man shiva. gauthami is killed by pawar and his group on her birthday, and she takes a last word from her husband to leave this violence and lead a peaceful life away from mafia.
deva respects her words. he, his sisters, and shiva leave to a small village called gandhipuram in east godavari district to start a new life, but pawar and his group think that deva is dead. chakrapani (nassar) is the head of this village with two sons, anand and ramakrishna (ram pothineni).
ramakrishna is a notorious guy in the village who bashes up the bad and respects his fathers principles. he is chased by a woman named nandu (bindu madhavi). anand, on the other hand, is a medico who is in love with his classmate sirisha (devas sister). feared of their parents not accepting their marriage, both of them elope to their uncle subba raos (brahmanandam) residence in mumbai. ramakrishna, priya, and shiva reach mumbai in search of this eloped couple only to get targeted by mafia again. pawar wants to finish shiva and priya but are saved by ramakrishna who later knows about deva's flashback.
ramakrishna now takes on the responsibility of his brothers marriage with sirisha and brings them back to gandhipuram but to be continuously chased by this mafia. at last when both the families agree for the marriage of ramakrishna with priya and anand with sirisha, here comes back mafia pawar to take the movie to the climax.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by m. m. keeravani, all lyrics were given by ananth sriram and released worldwide by aditya music. 
the album featured six tracks:

"rama rama krishna krishna" - karthik and ranjith
"ola ulala" - chaitra
"lera chanti" - karthik and chorus
"count down" - chaitanya
"endhukila" - m. m. keeravani, karthik, geetha madhuri
"thu go jilla" - chaitra, daler mehndi


== release ==
the film was released on 12 may 2010.  it was dubbed later into tamil as gandhipuram and hindi as nafrat ki jung by goldmines telefilms pvt ltd.


== references ==


== external links ==
rama rama krishna krishna at imdb