for the 1963 adventure film starring robert mitchum, see rampage.rampage is a 1987 american crime drama film written, produced and directed by william friedkin. the film stars michael biehn, alex mcarthur, and nicholas campbell.
in retrospect william friedkin said: "there are a lot of people who love rampage, but i dont think i hit my own mark with that"


== plot ==
charles reece is a serial killer who commits a number of brutal mutilation-slayings in order to drink blood as a result of paranoid delusions.
reece is soon captured. most of the film revolves around the trial and the prosecutor's attempts to have reece found sane and given the death penalty. defense lawyers, meanwhile, argue that the defendant is not guilty by reason of insanity.
the prosecutor, anthony fraser, was previously against capital punishment, but he seeks such a penalty in the face of reece's brutal crimes after meeting one victim's grieving family.
in the end, reece is found sane and given the death penalty, but fraser's internal debate about capital punishment is rendered academic when reece is found to be insane by a scanning of his brain for mental illness. in the ending of the original version of the film, reece is found dead in his cell, having overdosed himself on antipsychotics he had been stockpiling. in the ending of the revised version, reece is sent to a state mental hospital, and in a chilling coda, he sends a letter to a person whose wife and child he has killed, asking the man to come and visit him. a final title card reveals that reece is scheduled for a parole hearing in six months.


== cast ==
michael biehn as anthony fraser
alex mcarthur as charles "charlie" reece
nicholas campbell as albert morse
deborah van valkenburgh as kate fraser
john harkins as dr. keddie
art lafleur as mel sanderson
billy greenbush as judge mckinsey
royce d. applegate as gene tippetts
grace zabriskie as naomi reece
carlos palomino as nestode
roy london as dr. paul rudin
donald hotton as dr. leon gables
andy romano as spencer whaley
patrick cronin as harry bellenger
whitby hertford as andrew tippetts
brenda lilly as eileen tippetts
roger nolan as dr. roy blair
rosalyn marshall as sally ann
joseph whipp as dr. george mahon
angelo vitale as assist. d. a.
paul gaddoni as aaron tippetts


== influences ==
charles reece is loosely based on serial killer richard chase. the crimes that reece commits are slightly different from chase's, however; reece kills three women, a man and a young boy, whereas chase killed two men, two women (one of whom was pregnant), a young boy and a 22-month-old baby. additionally, reece escapes at one pointwhich chase did not domurdering two guards and later a priest. however, reece and chase similarly had a history of mental illness and an obsession with drinking blood. unlike reece, chase was sentenced to death, but he was found dead in his prison cell, an apparent suicide, before the sentence could be carried out.


== soundtrack ==
the film's score was composed, orchestrated, arranged and conducted by ennio morricone and was released on vinyl lp, cassette and compact disc by virgin records.
the soundtrack was mastered by greg fulginiti.


== release ==
rampage was filmed in 1986 in stockton, california. it played at the boston film festival in september 1987, and ran theatrically in some european countries in the late 1980s. plans for the film's theatrical release in america were shelved when production studio deg, the distributor of rampage, went bankrupt. the film was unreleased in north america for five years. during that time, director friedkin reedited the film, and changed the ending (with reece no longer committing suicide in jail) before its us release in october 1992. the european video versions usually feature the film's original ending.
in retrospect, william friedkin said: "at the time we made rampage, [producer] dino de laurentiis was running out of money. he finally went bankrupt, after a long career as a producer. he was doing just scores of films and was unable to give any of them his real support and effort. and so literally by the time it came to release rampage, he didnt have the money to do it. and he was not only the financier, but the distributor. his company went bankrupt, and the film went to black for about five years. eventually, the weinsteins company miramax took it out of bankruptcy and rereleased it. but this was among the lowest points in my career."


== reception ==
in his review, film critic roger ebert gave rampage three stars out of four saying, "this is not a movie about murder so much as a movie about insanityas it applies to murder in modern american criminal courts...friedkin['s] message is clear: those who commit heinous crimes should pay for them, sane or insane. you kill somebody, you fryunless the verdict is murky or there were extenuating circumstances."


== home media ==
as of 2010, the film has been released on dvd only in poland, by spi international.


== references ==

friedkin, william, the friedkin connection, harper collins, 2013


== external links ==
rampage at imdb
rampage at rotten tomatoes
rampage at box office mojo