reach for glory is a 1962 british film adaptation of john rae's 1961 novel, the custard boys, directed by philip leacock. it received a united nations award.


== plot ==
a group of boys, evacuated during world war ii from london to a coastal town, form a gang and play war games. too young to fight in the war and afraid it will be over by the time they come of age, the group members, who are also in the school's army cadet force initiate a battle with the local teenagers. curlew, a local youth, invites an austrian jewish refugee with whom he has formed a close relationship to take part in the shenanigans. at first the jewish boy, stein, is scorned because of his "germanic" heritage but is later allowed to join. when stein runs off during a fight, the youths decide to give him a fake court-martial and execution, but real bullets are used by a freak mistake and stein is killed.


== cast ==
harry andrews - capt. curlew
kay walsh - mrs. curlew
michael anderson jr - lewis craig
oliver grimm - mark stein
martin tomlinson - john curlew
freddie eldrett - willy aldrich
james luck - michael freen
john coker - peter joy
michael trubshawe - maj. burton
arthur hewlett - vicar
cameron hall - headmaster
allan jeayes - crabtree
richard vernon - dr. aldrich
russell waters - mr. freeman
patricia hayes - mrs. freeman
george pravda - mr. stein
john rae - lance freeman
alexis kanner - steven
peter furnell - arthur chettle
john pike - felix
melvin baker - chettle's lieutenant


== crew ==
directorphilip leacockproducersjud kinberg
john kohnmusic bybob russellcinematographyrobert hukefilm editingfrederick wilsonart directionjohn blezardproduction managementtimothy burrill (unit manager)
fred gunn (production manager)assistant directordavid tomblinsound departmentmaurice askew (sound recordist)
cyril collick (sound recordist)
don sharpe (dubbing editor)camera operatorronnie maaszmusic departmentraymond premru (conductor)
bob russell (lyricist: special lyrics)miscmaurice binder (title designer)
eileen head (continuity)


== references ==


== external links ==
reach for glory at imdb