red road is a 2006 psychological thriller film directed by andrea arnold and starring kate dickie, tony curran, martin compston, and natalie press. it tells the story of a cctv security operator who observes through her monitors a man from her past. it is named after, and partly set at, the red road flats in balornock, glasgow, scotland, which were the tallest residential buildings in europe at the time they were built. it was shot largely in a dogme 95 style, using handheld cameras and natural light. the observer polled several filmmakers and film critics who voted it as one of the best british films in the last 25 years.red road is the first film in advance party, a projected trilogy following a set of rules dictating how the films will be written and directed. they will all be filmed and set in scotland, using the same characters and cast. each film will be made by a different first-time director.


== plot ==
jackie morrison works in glasgow as a cctv operator, monitoring the red road flats. she lives alone and engages in occasional sex with married man avery.
jackie recognises a man she sees on the cctv monitor and begins inquiring about him. it is revealed that he is clyde henderson, a prisoner who has been released early for good behaviour but will be back in prison immediately if he steps out of line. she begins stalking clyde, tracking him on the cctv monitors and gathering information about him. she follows clyde to a cafe, and later learns he is throwing a party at the apartment he shares with fellow ex-con stevie. she gains entry to the party and begins exchanging looks with a drunk clyde. they dance, but she makes an excuse and runs out of the apartment.
after spotting clyde on cctv heading to a local bar, she goes there and sees him break up a fight between stevie and another man. stevie and his girlfriend return to clyde's apartment, while clyde initiates a conversation with jackie before inviting her back to the apartment too. clyde reveals he has a daughter, with whom he regrets he has lost contact. clyde and jackie have passionate sex, but she runs from the bedroom and stages rape, striking her face with a stone and fleeing from the apartment block in view of the cctv cameras. the police identify clyde as the rapist and jackie watches the arrest on cctv, and a few moments later sees clyde's daughter approach the apartment block. later, stevie gains entry to jackie's home and demands to know why she has falsely accused clyde. jackie reveals that clyde killed her husband and daughter.
jackie relents and tells the police she wishes to withdraw the accusation of rape. after clyde's release, jackie confronts him and they argue: clyde describes the road traffic accident that killed jackie's husband and daughter, and she reveals that her last words to her daughter were harsh. she tells clyde that his daughter tried to reach him on the day of his arrest, and they go their separate ways.


== cast ==
kate dickie as jackie morrison
tony curran as clyde henderson
martin compston as stevie
natalie press as april
paul higgins as avery


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
on review-aggregating website rotten tomatoes, the film has a score of 88% based on 88 reviews, for an average rating of 7.3/10, the critical consensus stating: "red road director andrea arnold skillfully parses out just enough plot details at a time to keep the audience engrossed in this seductive thriller." on metacritic, the film has a score of 73 out of 100 based on 18 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".


=== accolades ===
cannes film festival 2006  jury prize
bafta film awards 2006  special achievement by a british director, writer or producer in their first feature film
bafta scotland awards 2006  best screenplay
bafta scotland awards 2006  best actress in a scottish film (kate dickie)
bafta scotland awards 2006  best actor in a scottish film (tony curran)
bafta scotland awards 2006  best director
bafta scotland awards 2006  best film
british independent film awards 2006  best actress (dickie)
british independent film awards 2006  best actor (curran)
london film festival 2006  sutherland trophy awarded to "the director of the most original and imaginative first feature film"


== see also ==
list of films featuring surveillance


== references ==


== external links ==
red road at imdb
red road at allmovie
british films catalogue
cannes director urges cctv debate
interview with andrea arnold and kate dickie, filmmaker magazine web exclusives