restless natives is a 1985 scottish cinema adventure comedy, directed by michael hoffman.


== plot ==
the story follows the adventures of two scottish youths from the wester hailes district of edinburgh, played by vincent friell and joe mullaney, who, in rebellion to their drab lives in urban scotland in the mid-1980s, become modern highwaymen. donning masks of a clown and a wolf-man and riding a suzuki gp 125 motorbike, for a joke they waylay and hold up with a toy gun tourist coaches in the highlands, in the process becoming a tourist attraction themselves. having inadvertently acquired substantial amounts of money, they proceed to become modern robin hoods, doling it out to the poor of their city by scattering it on bike rides through its streets, attracting national media attention and pursuit by the police.


== themes ==
restless nativesas suggested by its titlehas underlying themes beyond its superficial presentation as a light social comedy film.  it was produced at a time of high unemployment in the united kingdom, with scotland being particularly affected by post-industrial economic blight, and being governed from london by an anglocentric radical political order that the scottish people had collectively electorally rejected in the recent 1983 united kingdom general election. the main storyline's premise reflected the frustration of mid-1980s scottish working class youth, with limited life chances and economic prospects at home, breaking free of their constraint in the dispiriting confines of a grim cityscape of mid-20th century brutalist urban architecture, using the freedom facilitated by a motorcycle (in a tacit reference to a recent admonition from a british government minister to the millions of unemployed in the country to "get on their bikes" to find elusive jobs) to escape into revitalizing open vistas of the landscape of the scottish highlands. the production was a part of a group of small-budget cinematic productions, along with titles such as gregory's girl (1981) and local hero (1983), that brought stories of contemporary life in scotland to a global cinema audience. the film acquired cult status, being regarded as a homemade expression of local scottish cultural pride, becoming a minor media source of insurgent scottish cultural identity, subliminally juxtaposed to britishness, and feeding into the developing protoscottish nationalist movement in the arts, with its soaring distinctive soundtrack from the band big country, whose music dealt with the same themes.


== music score ==
the soundtrack features music from the band big country.  this music was not released on an album but was combined into two lengthy tracks, each featuring various pieces of music and clips of actors from the film's audio, which appeared on limited edition formats of two big country 12" singles.  the soundtrack was released on cd for the first time on the 1998 big country collection restless natives & rarities, where it is presented as a single 35-minute track.


== production ==
the screenplay won a film script writing competition held by lloyds bank before it was optioned for production.


== reception ==
the film performed well at the box office in scotland, but commercially failed in other markets.


== see also ==
restless nation


== references ==


== external links ==
restless natives at imdb
dear scotland: you have been watching... restless natives (review)
the skinny: cult movie column - restless natives