reveille with beverly is a 1943 american musical film starring ann miller, franklin pangborn, and larry parks directed by charles barton, released by columbia pictures, based on the reveille with beverly radio show hosted by jean ruth hay.  it is also the name of the subsequent soundtrack album.
the film featured a number of notable guest appearances bysuch important big band era musicians as duke ellington, count basie, frank sinatra, the mills brothers, bob crosby, freddie slack, and ella mae morse.
in his narration for the 1977 documentary film life goes to war, johnny carson remarked that while he was stationed on guam during world war ii, he had "memorized the entire score - and most of the dialogue - of reveille with beverly".


== plot summary ==
beverly ross (ann miller) wants to be a radio personality, but has to run the switchboard at a local station. the blustery station owner mr. kennedy (tim ryan) wants no part of programming the "jive that she loves", preferring the classics. she sends the pompous early-morning personality vernon lewis (franklin pangborn) away for a vacation, so she can transform his dull classical-music program into a jive session. she invites suggestions and requests, and is swamped by mail from soldiers. she now devotes her show to the military, and the program becomes a success as "reveille with beverly." much of the film consists of musical numbers, visually representing the records she plays. the thin storyline connecting the songs concerns itself with beverly and lewis vying for control of the show, resulting in beverly constantly leaving and returning to her old job at a record store.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
one o'clock jump
written by count basie
played by count basie and his orchestra
take the 'a' train
written by billy strayhorn
sung by betty roche with duke ellington and the duke ellington orchestra
big noise from winnetka
music by ray bauduc and bob haggart
lyrics by ben pollack and bob crosby
played by bob crosby and his orchestra with vocals by lee wilde, lyn wilde, and david street
cow-cow boogie
written by benny carter, gene de paul, and don raye
sung by ella mae morse with freddie slack and his orchestra
cielito lindo
written by quirino mendoza
adapted with english lyrics by bill driggs
performed by the mills brothers
sweet lucy brown
written by leon ren and otis ren
performed by the mills brothers
thumbs up and v for victory
music by ted fio rito
lyrics by paul francis webster
sung and danced by ann miller with chorus
night and day
written by cole porter
sung by frank sinatra
wabash moon
written by dave dreyer and morton downey
performed by the radio rogues
when the moon comes over the mountain
music by harry m. woods
lyrics by howard johnson
performed by the radio rogues


== references ==


== external links ==
reveille with beverly at the american film institute catalog
reveille with beverly at imdb
reveille with beverly at allmovie
reveille with beverly at the tcm movie database