ride is a 1998 american comedy film written and directed by millicent shelton.  it stars malik yoba, fredro starr, and melissa de sousa.


== plot ==
new york city film school graduate leta evans (de sousa) has just become the assistant to exotic music video director bleau kelly (downtown julie brown). she almost loses the job before her first day's barely even started when bleau decides budget cuts must be made for her next project. when leta offers to do the assignment for a smaller fee, bleau decides to have her escort a group of rappers, singers, and showbiz wannabes to miami for a music video shoot. the gang, which is kept in line by poppa (yoba), gets acquainted on a decaying bus as they travel down the east coast, encountering barroom fights and other problems en route to the music video gig.


== cast ==
melissa de sousa as leta evans
fredro starr as geronimo
kellie shanygne williams as tuesday
malik yoba as poppa
sticky fingaz as brotha x
cedric the entertainer as bo
dartanyan edmonds as byrd
downtown julie brown as bleau kelly
guy torry as indigo
idalis delen as charity
john witherspoon as roscoe
julia garrison as blacke
the lady of rage as peaches
luther campbell as freddy b
rueben asher as casper
snoop dogg as mente


== music ==
 

a soundtrack containing hip hop music was released on january 27, 1998, by tommy boy records. it contained five charting singles, "the worst", "mourn you til i join you", "callin'", "jam on it" and "the weekend".


== reception ==

lael loewenstein of variety magazine describes the film as having "a few genuinely funny bits of dialogue and some earnest performances" that offset the predictable storyline. the review predicts the film will be popular with the target young urban audience, but with only slight chances of a crossover or international audience. loewenstein states that the script treads familiar road-movie territory, but the film itself is "technically well above average", including the effective costume, production design, and lensing. the acting is also judged to be "adequate all around" with a notable cameo from snoop dogg. entertainment weekly gives the film a grade of d+, calling it a mess and saying any serious issues raised in the film are immediately undercut by toilet humor, and whenever the road trip story gains momentum it is interrupted by cameo appearances. the new york times calls ride "a weak, unenergetic vehicle for character, comedy, romance, adventure or music."


== references ==


== external links ==
ride at allmovie
ride at imdb
ride at rotten tomatoes