right yaaa wrong (transl.right or wrong?) is a 2010 indian crime thriller film directed by neeraj pathak, starring sunny deol and irrfan khan in the lead roles. the film is based on the lives of two  police officers of india, who later become strong rivals. it also stars konkona sen sharma, isha koppikar, aryan vaid and govind namdeo. this film was shot in film city and released on 12 march 2010, under the banner of eros. the film has almost similar plot points to the 1995 hollywood film above suspicion (1995 film)


== plot ==
right yaaa wrong is a story of two cops, ajay (sunny deol) and vinay (irrfan khan), where an intense rivalry leads them on a battle for supremacy.
ajay and vinay are best friends. ajay's wife (isha koppikar) is found brutally murdered. ajay is the prime suspect and vinay is handed the case. unsure what to do, either help his best friend or achieve a higher position in his job, vinay goes against ajay. by this time, radhika (konkana sen sharma), vinay's younger sister takes up ajay's case as his lawyer, and is ajay's only support.
the investigation transpires into a mystery locked with secrets. behind the secrets lies an astonishing discovery. ripples begin with wits and mind games. every time hatching a clue, vinay tries to beat ajay, but gets beaten when ajay has a reply to all of his questions. this is the story of a strong friendship. when vinay is ready to throw in the towel and admit defeat the truth is finally revealed. ajay can walk and murdered his wife for being unfaithful. he had killed both her and her lover. but with no evidence to proof ajays guilt. ajay boards a plane to go abroad whereby he leaves a written note telling vinay that he was right. story is a retelling of christopher reeves above suspicion (1995).


== cast ==
sunny deol as acp ajay shridhar
irrfan khan as inspector vinay patnaik
konkona sen sharma as radhika patnaik
isha koppikar as anshita 'anshu' sridhar
aryan vaid as boris
arav chowdhary as sanjay sridhar
deepal shaw as inspector shalini
govind namdeo as a public prosecutor nigam
master ali haji as yash a. sridhar
suhasini mulay as a judge
kamlesh sawant as sawant
ali khan as mr. dacosta
parikshat sahni as a doctor
nilanjana bhattacharya
surendra rajan as a security guard
shillpi sharma in a special appearance
vijay patkar as police inspector
satish kashyap as police inspector
saidah jules


== critical reception ==
the film have received mixed reviews from critics. mayank shekhar of hindustan times and rajeev masand of ibn have panned the movie, while nikhat khazmi of times of india and taran adarsh of dna rated it below average. the film received an overall rating of 5/10. as of 28 march 2010, it was the worst movie of the year even though ipl was going on.


== references ==

as per box office india the film was a disaster . it grossed only 3.12 core. the first week occupancy was only 25% .1st week collection


== external links ==
right yaaa wrong at imdb
right yaa wrong reviews - reviewgang