risk is a  2007 indian hindi-language action thriller film directed by vishram sawant. it stars vinod khanna, randeep hooda, tanushree dutta, zakir hussain, yashpal sharma and anant jog in the lead roles. the movie is based on the mumbai underworld. randeep hooda plays the role of an honest cop, suryakant satam, fighting against the might of a bangkok-based don (crime lord) khalid bin jamal, played by vinod khanna. the music is provided by bapi-tutul, akbar sami and sandesh shandilya and the lyrics are by sandeep nath, amitabh verma and sudhir. the background score is by amar mohile.


== plot ==
for years, khalid bin jamal(vinod khanna) has ruled the mumbai crime underworld by staying in bangkok, thailand. despite his distance from mumbai, khalid is able to control his mumbai empire through keeping the ruling members of his network very close to him. he is also ruthless and shows no hesitation towards his enemies.
the indian police has been trying for years to extradite khalid to india but in vain. inspector suryakant (randeep hooda) has been in the police force some years and has been keeping track of khalid's activities. he makes up his mind to put an end to khalid's criminal empire and bring khalid to justice. to do so, he starts carrying out encounters against jamal's henchmen. over the course of a few weeks, khalid's network suffers as his men are simply killed in encounters and raids by suryakant, who is supported by d.c.p. uttam bhandari (shivkumar subramaniam). 
khalid becomes increasingly alarmed but comes up with a counter-plan. he arranges for one of his leading associates, the politician devki wardhan (seema biswas), to be attacked while suryakant is arresting her. her opponent, the home minister a.r. sarang (anant jog), has been known to be in favour with suryakant and is blackmailed by khalid into opening fire on devki wardhan. this implicates suryakant as being an accomplice to devki wardhan's attempted murder where two of devki's men are shot dead by suryakant. soon, a string of allegations that include taking bribes from different crime lords is formed against suryakant. his plan to capture khalid with bold moves thus backfires because of khalid's premeditated scheme.
the police commissioner is close to devki wardhan and is against suryakant and tries all the time to suppress him. suryakant's love interest shraddha (tanushree dutta) also does not support him and distances away from him due to his involvement with the underworld.
in jail, suryakant receives messages from khalid. his image tarnished, suryakant is offered his police officer position by khalid as long as he does his bidding. he is also handsomely rewarded. suryakant starts working energetically for khalid and wipes out khalid's sworn enemy, s.p. naidu's (zakir hussain) men who eventually khalid's enemies as also khalid's men on the pretext that they were killed by khalid's goons. arbaaz (yashpal sharma), khalid's hot-headed brother, smells a rat and suspects the designs of suryakant. he travels to india with hari (makarand deshpande) without informing khaled to personally deal with naidu . naidu is killed by arbaaz but suddenly suryakant reveals his true colours by killing arbaaz and home minister sarang and making it appear as if arbaaz had murdered sarang.
the supposed death of a home minister at the hands of khalid's brother is enough to have khalid extradited to mumbai for trial. however, despite all of suryakant's painstaking uncovering of khalid's illicit activities, the indian police cannot make a firm case against him. moreover. khalid heavily bribes the police prosecutor in his favour. khalid is sure his case will be dismissed by the court and he will leave india in a day but before doing so, wants retribution for arbaaz's death and orders his men to dispose of suryakant's comrades in the police force. shraddha realizes her folly of not being supportive to suryakant and asks for his apology. suryakant is informed that shraddha's life is in danger and that she will get killed by khaled's men. suryakant sends shraddha safely away out of the country.
khaled sends message for suryakant to meet him in jail. before suryakant has a chance to find out about the murders of dcp bhandari, inspector shridhar (ganesh yadav) and his other close colleagues, khalid himself tells him about them during their meeting in jail. he also tells suryakant he will go free despite all he has done. suryakant is shocked by this truth and decides the only choice he has is to eliminate khalid bin jamal. in a climactic ending, suryakant storms the heavily guarded jail where khalid is being held and manages to kill him. probably mortally wounded, the last thing suryakant sees is khalid's lifeless body. he smiles and the movie ends.


== cast ==
randeep hooda as suryakant satam
vinod khanna as khalid bin zamal:  biggest don (ruler) of the crime-ridden mumbai underworld.
yashpal sharma as arbaaz bin jamal:  the hot-tempered brother of khalid.
zakir hussain as s.p. naidu:  a rival gang leader of khalid's.
anant jog as a.r. sarang:  home-minister of mumbai.  he has many underworld connections.
seema biswas as devki wardhan: associate of khalid's.  she is heavily involved in politics.
tanushree dutta as shraddha:  suryakant's girlfriend.
ganesh yadav as inspector shridhar:  suryakant's superior and an honest officer.
d. santosh as khalid jamal's mentally challenged son.
makarand deshpande as hari, khaled's man.
shivkumar subramaniam as dcp uttam bhandari.
chetan pandit as devki's lawyer.
murari kumar as goon.
madhuri bhagwat as suryakant's mother.
pradeep velankar as police commissioneralso in the cast are suhas palshikar, rajendra sethi and ashraful haq,


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by akbar sami, bapitutul, sandesh shandilya and released by home records audio.


== further reading ==
raha, shuma (26 january 2007). "the risk in being repetitive". the telegraph. archived from the original on 27 september 2020. retrieved 27 september 2020. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)
mirani, indu (19 january 2007). "carry on shooting". daily news and analysis. archived from the original on 27 september 2020. retrieved 27 september 2020. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)
joshi, namrata (5 february 2007). "risk". outlook. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)
"risk". the financial express. 21 january 2007. archived from the original on 27 september 2020. retrieved 27 september 2020. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)
vyavahare, renuka (19 january 2007). "risk". the times of india. archived from the original on 27 september 2020. retrieved 27 september 2020. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)
"risk". the times of india. times news network. 20 january 2007. archived from the original on 27 september 2020. retrieved 27 september 2020. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)
mohamed, khalid (22 january 2007). "review: give risk a miss". hindustan times. archived from the original on 27 september 2020. retrieved 27 september 2020. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)
jain, priyanka (19 january 2007). "risk is worth a watch". rediff.com. archived from the original on 27 september 2020. retrieved 27 september 2020. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)
adarsh, taran (19 january 2007). "risk movie review". bollywood hungama. archived from the original on 27 september 2020. retrieved 27 september 2020. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)
gahlot, deepa (22 january 2007). "risk". sify.com. archived from the original on 27 september 2020. retrieved 27 september 2020. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)


== external links ==
risk at imdb