robinn hood, also known robin hood, is a 2009 indian malayalam-language crime thriller film directed by joshiy and written by sachi-sethu. the film stars prithviraj sukumaran, narain, bhavana, jayasurya, biju menon, and samvrutha sunil. it was released on 24 september 2009.


== plot ==
venki (prithviraj) is an entrance coaching professor by day and robs automated teller machines (atms) using fake debit cards by night. he has been operating out of kochi for the past three months and the imperial bank of india (ibi) is the target of all these robberies.
acp harris (jayasurya) is in charge of the investigation. but the managing director of the bank, nandakumar menon (biju menon), is not happy with the way the investigations are proceeding as the cops have been harassing the bank's customers. the bank authorities have ruled out a problem in their systems as the same system is used by other banks. the other banks are not yet a target. all the transactions done by the robber have been using a debit card.
nandakumar menon decides to conduct an investigation in parallel with the cops. he summons a private detective alexander felix (narain). felix is an unkempt young man who opted out of ips. on the first day, he oversleeps on the train and does not disembark at kochi. but appearances are deceptive. beneath the surface, felix is a sharp investigator. in order to assist him, the bank also appoints a senior systems manager, roopa (bhavana). felix and roopa move into the ibi guesthouse, which is right across from venki's apartment. slowly, the trio begins a friendship. the rest of the story focuses on what happens to the three friends, how felix succeeds in finding the atm thief and what is the story behind venki's hatred towards ibi. abhirami (samvrutha sunil) adds to the star cast as one of venkatesh's students who has a crush on him.


== cast ==
prithviraj as siddharth venkitesh iyer aka venki
narain as alexander felix
bhavana as roopa
jayasurya as acp harris mohammed ips
biju menon as t. nandakumar menon (ibi bank md)/ (2day builder md)/ (ibi bank zonal manager)
samvritha sunil as abhirami
p. sreekumar as sundaram(ibi bank zonal manager)
lena as meera
salim kumar as nassar
janardhanan as siddharth's father
jaffer idukki as sunny
shobha mohan as siddharth's mother
t. p. madhavan as minister manjooran
pratheesh nandan as jithesh
pawan as nandakumar menon's henchman
chali pala as police officer
anil murali as police officer robin
sudhi koppa as bike passenger
nandhu podhuval as minister's p.a


== soundtrack ==
music: m. jayachandran; lyrics: kaithapram damodaran

"jaalam maayaajaalam" - shaan, abu murali
"parannu vanna painkili" - benny dayal, achu, suchithra karthik
"ponnalle" - jassie gift
"priyanu matram" - shweta mohan, vijay yesudas


== references ==


== external links ==
robin hood at imdb