rocket singh: salesman of the year is a 2009 indian comedy-drama film directed by shimit amin and produced by aditya chopra under the yash raj films banner and released in 2009. screenplay of the film is by jaideep sahni, who collaborated with shimit amin for chak de! india. it stars ranbir kapoor, d. santosh and naveen kaushik in the leads roles. prem chopra and shazahn padamsee daughter of alyque padamsee and sharon prabhakar, who makes her debut in the film, play supporting roles.


== plot ==
harpreet singh bedi  (ranbir kapoor), a b com graduate with approximately 39 percent marks becomes a salesman with a big corporate computer assembly and service company, ays. within a few days, a client asks for a kick-back. the top salesmen at ays acquire large client contracts through bribery. in such a corrupt company culture, harpreet's honesty only brings him a demotion and humiliation. after making concessions to a client for the company, harpreet realizes that sales success is dependent on the customer; so if the customer is satisfied then bribery will not be necessary to secure these contracts. no one agrees with him but harpreet remains firm on his belief and forms his own company, rocket sales corporation, from within ays. rocket sales is being managed by the ays offices where the rocket partners were still employed. unlike ays, rocket sales corporation's overall strategic goal is customer service and customer satisfaction as opposed to just selling the product through bribes and providing zero customer service. other disgruntled employees of ays find their way to rocket sales  a place where even the guy who serves tea is an equal partner because he brings talent to the table.
the five-member company targets previous clients of ays, who were irritated with ays's attitude and soon enjoys a strong client reputation. the company soon becomes successful because of its dedication to excellent customer service. although it does not make much profit. rocket sales corp is able to make a huge difference. ays's sales start decreasing as many of the clients cancel their orders and place orders at rocket sales, which offers them better services. harpreet starts a relationship with sherena, his first client, whose fashion business had failed.
the md of ays, sunil puri, becomes angered by the small company's success. puri moves quickly to attempt to contact the md of rocket sales corporation and in a phone conversation attempts to entice him to sell rocket sales corporation to ays (he does not know it is harpreet). harpreet not only rejects puri's offer but says that his company will buy ays computers. afraid of puri's attempts, harpreet's partners have a discussion and move their headquarters to sherena's house, making her a partner in the process. after multiple failed attempts in locating the rocket sales corporation office, puri decides to call the number on rocket sales corporation's brochures and the phone at the ays reception desk begins to ring. after thoroughly insulting him and firing both him and his partners, the md has harpreet sign a contract handing over rocket sales to him for a final compensation of re. 1. however, ays is unable to maintain rocket sales' commitment to customer satisfaction because of its cold and greedy personnel. the md, realizing his downfall in purchasing rocket sales, visits harpreet at his new job at croma, an electronics store, and returns the contract to harpreet in return for re. 1. he also tells him never to become a businessman again, because he will fail again. however, this is not intended as an insult, but rather as a compliment; he implies that what made harpreet so successful was his eschewing of 'normal' business practices such as kickbacks, false advertisement, and low wages.
the ending scene is the new rocket sales office building where a prospective worker is going in for an interview. the firm is implied to be very successful. it shows the former employees, all partners of the business, and finally closes with harpreet smiling genially at a desk, showing that in the long run, honesty and hard work are sound business practices.


== cast ==
ranbir kapoor as harpreet singh bedi
gauahar khan as koena sheikh
shazahn padamsee as sherena khanna
d. santosh as girish reddy
manish chaudhary as sunil puri
naveen kaushik as nitin rathore
neeraj sood as lalwani
mukesh s bhatt as chhotelal mishra
moksha dodwani as tanmay (taxi)
rajesh jais as choudhary
amol parashar as sai
debi dutta as aparna
prem chopra as p.s.bedi, harpreet's grandfather
nidhi oza as vibha


== critical reception ==
film critic, rachel saltz of new york times called it "a smart, focused bollywood movie" and commended ranbir kapoor for "turning in a skillfully understated performance" while anupama chopra in her ndtv review gave it 3 out 5 stars.nikhat kazmi in the times of india gave 3 stars out 5. an the economic times review gave it a 4 stars out of 5 and called it, "one of the most rocking films of the year" an outlook review by namrata joshi gave it 3 out of 5 stars, saying that the film "marks a continuum and a departure from the middle-class cinema of hrishikesh mukherjee, basu chatterjee and sai paranjape." rajeev masand of cnn-ibn gave the movie 3.5 stars out of 5.many of the serial entrepreneurs called it "a learning bollywood movie for upcoming entrepreneurs" - take risk & build relationship with clients is one of the lesson taught in the movie.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack is composed by salimsulaiman, with lyrics by jaideep sahni. this


== awards and nominations ==


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
rocket singh: salesman of the year at imdb
rocket singh: salesman of the year bollywood hungama