rowdy fellow  is a 2014 telugu language political action comedy film film, written and directed by krishna chaitanya and produced by t. prakash reddy under his banner moviemills, and presented by cinema 5. this hybrid genre film stars nara rohit and vishakha singh in the lead roles, while rao ramesh, paruchuri venkateswara rao, posani krishna murali, supreeth, praveen, ahuti prasad, and madhunandan, among others, play supporting roles. sunny has composed music for the film. the film was later dubbed into hindi as mard the khiladi and released by aditya music india pvt. ltd. in 2018.


== plot ==
rana prathap jayadev (nara rohit) is a rich brat and a very egoistic person. once he was disturbed by a political rally who was organizing by mp asuragana durga prasad's (rao ramesh) henchmen. he then gets into a quarrel with them. this issue then leads to the police station in the dealing. the sp (ahuti prasad) demands that rana should apologise to the henchmen, but rana did not oblige. rana then argues with the police, but when sp grabs his collar he gets angry towards the sp and apologizes to the henchmen, and warns sp that he would be hearing about him soon.
after that, rana decides to become a police officer to take revenge on the sp. he then uses high influence and huge money as a bribe to a minister. he becomes a sub-inspector to a rural area. he focuses on the law and order, settles the disputes in his own style, and becomes a headache to sp. rana befriends constable reddy (praveen), who becomes a trusted aid to him. he soon falls in love with the sp's daughter megha (vishakha singh), and after comical encounters, she also falls for him.
afterwards, rana takes up the head constable's (paruchuri venkateswara rao) missing case. on the enquiry, he came to know that he was missing since his joining date in the department. while investigation, he comes to know that with the help of the ci, prasad's henchmen were involved in this case for a lockup death issue. rana then finds out the sole witness: the colleague of the constable. the colleague confesses that the ci killed the person in the police station and blackmails them to bribe him for a ransom. the colleague ran away from the village, and as the constable could not fight for his ethics, he commits suicide. the ci then tries to hide his body, but it was founded by rana. rana tries to arrest the ci, but while in a chase, the ci met with an ambulance accident and died.
from that day onwards, rana intervenes in all of prasad's activities and understands the corruption in the police system. with the help of his father, he gives more salaries to his lower police and orders them to work honestly and sincerely. he also comprises with sp and with the his acceptance megha and rana get married. rana continues targeting prasad, during one fight he kills prasad's brother. then, prasad attacks rana, but while in the fight, he was backstabbed by reddy and gets severe injuries. rana was then rescued by his father's appointed private securities, lead by rana's other trusted aid: his private security guard james. prasad then came to know that rana was alive and then he arranges a meeting to compromise with him through reddy. in the meeting, they both quarrel, and finally, rana shoots prasad to death. finally, the film ends with rana forgiving reddy for his actions and joining with him.


== cast ==


== filming ==
the principal photography of the film occurred in various locations of india, including telangana, andhra pradesh & goa.
rowdy fellow also features an unused number by the late music director anil reddy who is remembered for his music in films like 'sambhavami yuge yuge', 'gamyam', 'lbw', 'kalavar king' etc. this enchanting melody song was shot in the beautiful locales of virginia, washington dc and maryland of the united states, but was later removed from the movie for reasons unknown. the team launched the promotion of the film
with a digital poster on 25 may, to commemorate the late music director's birthday.


== soundtrack ==
the film's music released on 16 september 2014 to enthusiastic reviews on the web. honourable chief minister of andhra pradesh, shri nara
chandra babu naidu, blessed the unit members on the eve of the event. thereafter, the album topped telugu music charts for weeks to follow.


== release ==
the movie was given 'u/a' certificate. and the film released on 21 november 2014.


== critical reception ==
the film received positive reviews from critics. 123telugu wrote nara rohit requires to work more on his expressions to evolve as an actor and just an ok to watch and rated the film 3 out of 5. idlebrain.com gave 3 out of 5 and said rowdy fellow is an attempt narrate a story of an egoist turning into good samaritan by doing selfless help to the people in a village. hourdose stated "overall rowdy fellow is a good one-time watch commercial film with some decent performances by the cast, good music, nice dialogues and some stylish visuals."


== awards and nominations ==


== references ==


== external links ==
rowdy fellow at imdb
[1]
[2]