run for your wife is a 2012 british comedy film, based on the 1983 theatre farce run for your wife, written by ray cooney, who along with john luton also directed the film. upon release the film was panned by critics and has been referred to as one of the worst films of all time, after it grossed just 602 in its opening weekend at the british box office to its 900,000 budget. it was released on 14 february 2013.


== plot ==
the story of london cab driver john smith, with two wives, two lives and a very precise schedule for juggling them both. with one wife at home in stockwell and another at home in finsbury.
trouble brews when smith intervenes in a mugging. after being hit on the head, he ends up in hospital. this upsets his schedule and causes both wives to report him missing. smith becomes hopelessly entangled in his attempts with his doltish ne'er-do-well neighbour downstairs in stockwell, to explain himself to his wives and two suspicious police officers.


== cast ==
danny dyer	 john smith
neil morrissey  gary gardner
denise van outen  michelle smith
sarah harding  stephanie smith
kellie shirley  susie browning
christopher biggins  bobby franklin
lionel blair  cyril
nicholas le prevost  d. s. porterhouse
ben cartwright  d. s. troughton
derek griffiths  stockwell police officer
nick wilton  taxi driver
jeffrey holland  dick holland
louise michelle  frances


=== cameo roles (alphabetical) ===
russ abbot  hospital patient
robin askwith  bus driver
lynda baron  nurse
richard briers  newspaper seller
tony britton  man on bus
jess conrad  piano player
tom conti  actor
wendy craig  nanny
bernard cribbins  hospital patient
barry cryer  busker
ian cullen  wrinkled man
pamela cundell  war widow
geoffrey davies  man in theatre queue
judi dench  bag lady
les dennis - man on street
noel edmonds - man in shop
jean fergusson - exercising woman
derek fowlds  man in hat
william gaunt  man on bus
liza goddard  exercising woman
rolf harris  busker
nicky henson  hospital patient
louise jameson  doctors receptionist
vernon kay - plate-spinning man
jeff leach - thief in shop
maureen lipman  exercising woman
katy manning - exercising woman
vicki michelle  tourist
brian murphy  allotment man
derren nesbitt  man on bus
geoffrey palmer  man on toilet
bill pertwee  man on bus
jacki piper - nurse
su pollard  newsagent
linda regan - allotment woman
cliff richard  busker
andrew sachs  clumsy waiter
prunella scales  woman at pub
jenny seagrove  taxi passenger
donald sinden  man on bus
pat sharp - man in flat
sylvia syms  hip operation woman
frank thornton  man getting off bus
wanda ventham  lady on bus
marcia warren  woman on seat
dennis waterman  minding person
giles watling  man in pub
moray watson  man on bus
timothy west  man in pub
june whitfield  exercising woman
simon williams  caf customer
mark wingett  man outside caf


== production ==
over 80 celebrities agreed to make cameo appearances having all agreed to donate their fees to a theatrical charity.  the executive producer is vicki michelle.


== reception ==
run for your wife was met with so many overwhelmingly negative reviews upon release that the reviews themselves were widely reported in the uk media. the film was variously described as "a catastrophe", "as funny as leprosy" and "30 years past its sell-by date", with the guardian reviewer peter bradshaw saying that it "makes the dick emery show look edgy and contemporary". the independent's anthony quinn wrote, "the stage play ran for nine years  it [the film] will be lucky to run for nine days. perhaps never in the field of light entertainment have so many actors sacrificed so much dignity in the cause of so few jokes... from the look of it, cooney hasn't been in a cinema for about 30 years". the cameo-heavy cast was commented upon by several reviewers, with the metro commenting that "no one emerges unscathed among the cameo-packed cast that reads largely like a roll-call for brit tv legends you'd previously suspected deceased". the daily record described the film as "an exasperating farce containing not one single, solitary laugh. comprised of people losing their trousers and falling over, the film looks like a pilot for a (mercifully) never-commissioned 70s sitcom". an article in the independent described run for your wife (along with the similarly badly received movie 43) as contenders for the title of the "worst film in history". the berkhamsted & tring gazette reported "critics have being queuing up to batter recent release run for your wife, with general agreement that it ranks among the worst british comedies of all time". the south african newspaper daily news stated that "run for your wife could be the worst film in history", the studio briefing website reported that "some writers are making the case that the british comedy run for your wife, written by and starring [sic] comedian ray cooney, may be the worst film ever", and the daily mirror reported (a few months after its release) that run for your wife "was branded the worst british film ever."run for your wife currently has a 0% rating on rotten tomatoes.


== see also ==
list of films considered the worst


== references ==


== external links ==
run for your wife at imdb