run is a 2016 indian telugu-language black comedy thriller film directed by anil kanneganti and produced by ajay sunkara, kishore garikipati, and sudhakar cherukuri. it is the remake of malayalam and tamil bilingual neram. the film features sundeep kishan and anisha ambrose in the lead roles, while bobby simha reprises his role as vatti raja from the bilingual film.  the film was released worldwide on 23 march 2016 to positive critical acclaim.


== plot ==
run is all about the lives of sanjay alias sanju (sundeep kishan) and amulya alias amu (anisha ambrose).
sanju is a computer engineering graduate but lost his job. his life is a little complicated now because he has taken a loan from a private moneylender named vatti raja (bobby simha) and is not able to repay the amount because he has no income.  amu's father srinivas (y. kasi viswanath) denies her marriage with sanju as he is jobless. amu decides to elope with sanju, and his friend mani (praveen) gives him the money for paying off his debt to raja. on their way, amu's chain is snatched, and sanju's money is stolen. raja calls sanju and asks him to settle the money within 5pm.
srinivas lodges a complaint with sub-inspector padmavathi (brahmaji) against sanju on charges of kidnapping amu and gives his number. padmavathi calls sanju and tells him that he should come along with amu to the police station within 5pm, but problems are yet to come; sanju's brother-in-law (madhunandan) asks some amount of money from him to start a business (even that is scheduled for 5pm). on the other hand, amu is kidnapped by raja's men, assuming her to be other man's girlfriend who also has to return money to raja.
sanju comes across the same man and decides to snatch his chain, but unfortunately at the moment, he tries to snatch the chain, the man meets with an accident, and sanju takes him to a hospital. the man's brother posani balakrishna (posani krishna murali), who has influence, assures sanju of a job in his company. suddenly, padmavathi arrives there and says that raja died in an accident. a flashback reveals that lighthouse (shani salmon), the man who stole amu's chain and sanju's money, had borrowed some money from raja, too. he plots with two others in having the money for themselves and stealing raja's car. while the plan works out perfectly, raja's men went behind the car, and raja goes behind the other man. in the chase, raja is hit by an auto and dies. coincidentally, the auto driver (ambati srinivas) was the driver who hit posani's brother manik (mahat raghavendra) with his vehicle, too.
last of all, sanju meets the men who stole his money and involves in a brawl with them. he finds his money and a chain inside the car and also finds amu in the car's rear (raja hid her in his car). sanju gives the money to his brother-in-law, and the movie ends with a happy note that "time is of two types: good time and bad time. good will come following every bad time in life".


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==


== release ==
run was released on 23 march 2016 across telangana and andhra pradesh coinciding with holi festival.


== reception ==
y. sunitha chowdary of the hindu  found that the movie was set for a decent run.hans india gave a rating of 3 out of 5 stars and stated that the film was an entertainer and worth watching once.123telugu.com gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and stated that the film was different thriller.


== references ==


== external links ==
run at imdb