tu sooraj main saanjh, piyaji (transl.you are the sun, i am the twilight, beloved) is an indian television soap opera that aired on star plus. produced by shashi sumeet productions, the series starred rhea sharma and avinesh rekhi. it is the sequel to diya aur baati hum. the series premiered on 3 april 2017 and ended on 1 june 2018.it was originally broadcast in the afternoon during the network's star dopaher (afternoon) programming block. on 24 july 2017, the series was moved to prime time replacing saath nibhaana saathiya.
the series are remade into telugu as agnisakshi, tamil into siva manasula sakthi, bengali into ardhangini and kannada into sarvamangala mangalye.


== plot ==
the series takes place 20 years after the events in diya aur baati hum and it revolves around the children of sooraj and sandhya, mainly focusing on their daughter, kanak. 
kanak's grandmother, santosh who initially hates her to the core, blaming her to be the reason behind her parent's death, sooraj and sandhya's death. she fixes her alliance with mayank who lives abroad in london. kanak's life takes a new turn when uma shankar toshniwal, a rich, kind-hearted but superstitious man and an ayurveda doctor by profession, forcefully marries her, believing that as a sign from lord. uma is a blind believer in morals taught by his greedy and hypocritical maternal aunt. kanak sets off on a journey with uma to teach him the greatest moral of life  humanity. in the process, kanak falls in love with uma after establishing herself as the perfect wife for him. she divorces uma and demands 50% of his property which is named on nanda. when uma and palomi are getting married, uma feels that kanak is in danger so he leaves his marriage and searches kanak. he finds kanak in a forest where aditya hangs kanak on a tree. he saves her life and sends aditya to jail.
uma and kanak confess their love and decide to get married in ten days. kanak exposes nanda and aditya in front of uma when she gives poison to laddus. nanda then falsely accuses uma for killing palomi and gets him sentenced jailed for ten years. they both escape and go to bangkok. they change their identity and expose nanda and aditya.
after returning to india they soon decide to get married but uma, for some unknown reason, marries meera mittal, the deranged daughter of a rich businessman, ditching kanak.


=== two years later ===
kanak is now self-sufficient and possessing a bitter hatred towards uma, eventually reappears in his life, who has become a successful business tycoon running the 'k & u' company in the meantime. it is revealed later on that uma still loves kanak and was actually blackmailed and forced into marrying meera to save his younger cousin suman from receiving punishment for a murder she had inadvertently committed. meera upon knowing kanak's identity, along with aditya, tries many heinous ways to separate the duo, including an unsuccessful attempt to marry off kanak to akshay also was hell-bent on ruining her. suman is now full of guilt and decides to sacrifice her life so that uma and kanak can re-unite. they save her and the truth is finally unveiled before kanak. she gets rid of her ill-feelings towards uma and gets meera arrested with the help of others by hatching a crafty plan.
they remarry after settling their differences and restore their relationship. aditya realises his mistake and becomes loyal to his brother and sister-in-law. it is then that nanda comes out of jail.
after saras suffering an unfortunate miscarriage on account of failing to reach the medical facility on time, and seeing uma's grief over the matter, kanak and aditya launch a bike ambulance service for uma. this creates a number of enemies for uma and kanak from the very outset, and dr. parag, the corrupt dean of pratistha medical college, joins hands with nanda to cancel uma's license so that he can use the idea to promote his own medical college and take the credit totally upon himself. kanak decides to study paramedics and become a doctor herself to save the license from being cancelled and so that no one can label her as an amateur when she treats patients.
after facing numerous hurdles and hindrances in dr. parag's college set by the dean himself in order to crush her dream, she finally succeeds in revealing dr. parag's true nature in front of the public and manages to get him behind bars. it is revealed at this point that nanda was ill-treated by dr. parag while in jail, and she was planning for revenge ever since she got out of jail. she afterwards stops plotting against uma and kanak.
uma at this time receives a fake call and is attacked by goons, who also trash his bike ambulance. he recovers 6 months later, but loses his memory. to everyone's surprise, he turns into the same superstitious person he was before. he force kanak to either choose him or pursue her paramedics course. kanak ultimately chooses to continue her dream of becoming a doctor. uma supports her decision, and aditya then reveal that it was their plan all along to infuse some confidence and passion into kanak, which she was lacking  and also that he had never lost his memory. with this, the story finally ends on a happy note as kanak sets off for her new career with the blessings of all the elders.


== cast ==


=== main ===
rhea sharma as dr. kanak shankar toshniwal (ne rathi): sandhya and sooraj's daughter; ved and vansh's sister; uma's wife. (20172018)
avinesh rekhi as dr. uma shankar toshniwal: saraswati's brother; kanak's husband; meera's ex-husband. (20172018)


=== recurring ===
neelu vaghela as santosh rathi (bhabho): arun's wife; sooraj, vikram, mohit and chavvi's mother. (201718)
ashok lokhande as arun rathi (bhabasa): santhosh's husband; sooraj, vikram, mohit and chavvi's father. (20172018)
mayank arora as ips ved rathi: sandhya and sooraj's son; vansh and kanak's brother; payal's husband.(20172018)
kabeer kumar as vansh rathi: sandhya and sooraj's son; kanak and ved's brother; saraswati's husband. (20172018)
kanika maheshwari as meenakshi rathi: vikram's wife; mishri and golu's mother. (2017)
rajeev singh as vikram rathi: santosh and arun's son; sooraj, mohit and chavvi's brother; meena's husband; mishri and golu's father. (2017)
uday nene as golu rathi: vikram and meena's son; mishri's brother; rani's husband. (2017)
unknown as pavan rathi: mishri's illegitimate son. (2017)
sheetal pandya as rani rathi: golu's wife; rathi family's ex-maidservant. (20172018)
urmila sharma as daisa: rathi family's neighbour. (2017)
sadiya siddiqui as nanda modani: uma's maternal aunt; aditya's mother. (20172018)
madhura naik as palomi: a girl who was favoured by nanda for uma who lives as a domestic help of the toshniwals. (20172018)
hearty singh as shiv toshniwal: uma's younger cousin; suman's younger brother. (20172018)
mazel vyas as suman toshniwal: uma's younger cousin; shiv's elder sister. (20172018)
swati kapoor as saraswati rathi: uma's younger sister, vansh's wife. (20172018)
shefali singh soni as payal rathi: ved's wife, aditya's ex wife. (20172018)
unknown as kaushalya toshniwal: uma and saraswati's mother and nanda's elder sister. (20172018)
madhvendra jha as gabbasa/gagendra singh: uma's personal assistant. (20172018)
vikas grover as arvind: kanak's friend. (2017)
hetal yadav as payal's mother. (20172018)
rajiv kumar as payal's father. (2017)
rishina kandhari as arpita khanna: akshay's elder sister, formerly an ips officer then a politician. (20172018)
ayush anand as aditya modani:  nanda's son, uma's cousin, payal's ex-husband. (20172018)
aditya pandey as purab rathi: kanak's cousin(2018)
maqbool khan as sumer singh. (2018)
kangna sharma as meera mittal: uma's second/divorced wife. (2018)
amit singh thakur as yash mittal: meera's father. (2018)
ankit bathla as akshay khanna: arpita's younger brother. (2018)
abhaas mehta as dr. parag bansal: dean of pratistha medical college. (2018)
sanjai gandhi as divya prakash: dr. parag's elder brother. (2018)
honey singh as tiara: kanak's classmate in the pratistha medical college. (2018)
aanchal khurana as madhavi: kanak's professor at pratistha medical college. (2018)
rekha choudhary as surbhi (2018)


=== guests ===
anas rashid as sooraj rathi: ved, vansh and kanak's father.(2017)
deepika singh as sandhya rathi: ved, vansh and kanak's mother (appeared in flashbacks only from diya aur baati hum).(2017)
gagan malik as bal brahmachari. (2017)


== production ==


=== development ===
this sequel of diya aur baati hum was planned before it going off air itself. actress neelu vaghela playing santosh revealed the title of the series in february 2017 as tu sooraj main saanjh, piyaji. the title of the series was taken from the title track of diya aur baati hum.the series began with a leap of 20 years in its storyline from diya aur baati hum focusing on sandhya (deepika singh) and sooraj's (anas rashid) children, mainly kanak (rhea sharma) after their death.this series was launched originally during star plus afternoon slot named star plus dopahar block along with three other series, aiming at retrieving the afternoon programming of the channel. soon, in june 2017, this series among the others was moved to the prime time replacing saath nibhana saathiya as the makers and the channel felt that it could reach a larger audience and also it being a sequel to one of the popular show diya aur baati hum.playback singer palak muchhal was roped to sing for the title track of the series.
singers amit trivedi and shreya ghoshal collaborated for the title track of the series.


=== filming ===
based on the backdrop of rajasthan, the series was mainly filmed at sets in mumbai. some of the initial scenes were shot in kerala and jaipur, rajasthan. in january 2018, the sequence of kanak and uma searching for palomi was shot in thailand.


=== casting ===
neelu vaghela, ashok lokhande, kanika maheshwari, urmila sharma and rishina kandhari reprised their roles from diya aur baati hum. rajeev singh was roped for the role of vikram rathi which was played by karan goddwani in the former series.avinesh rekhi was roped for the role of uma shankar. rhea sharma was roped for the lead role of kanak. besides mayank arora, kabeer kumar, uday nene, sheetal pandey, sheefali singh soni, sadiya siddiqui, madhura naik, mazel vyas and swathi kapoor were cast then.in november 2017, kanika maheshwari playing meenakshi quit the series as she stated nothing yet to explore in her character. in february 2018, kangana sharma was roped for the role of meera mittal, making her television debut. soon, in march 2018, ankit bhatla was cast as akshay.


=== cancellation ===
with the time slot shift from afternoon to prime time, the ratings of the series had an increase but as it could not garner expected ratings in the slot, it was sent a notice by the channel on may 2018 and was taken off air on 1 june 2018.


== reception ==


== remakes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
hotstar
tu sooraj main saanjh, piyaji on imdb