saathiya (english: companion) is a 2002 indian hindi-language romantic drama film directed by shaad ali and produced by mani ratnam and yash chopra under the banner of yash raj films. the film stars rani mukerji and vivek oberoi in lead roles, with shah rukh khan and tabu appearing in extended special appearances. the soundtrack was composed by a. r. rahman and the lyrics are penned by gulzar. it is a remake of the tamil film alaipayuthey whose climax was reported to be inspired by the 1998 movie sliding doors and which was directed by mani ratnam with music composed by rahman as well. box office india declared the film a hit. additionally, the film won 6 filmfare awards.


== plot ==
aditya sehgal (vivek oberoi) and his friends are searching for aditya's wife suhani sehgal (rani mukerji). she has been missing for hours, a few days after having a fight with aditya about their failing marriage. but aditya now realizes that he loves her more than anything and is devastated that he can't find her.
the film goes into a flashback, where it is seen that aditya and suhani meet each other at a wedding. aditya immediately falls in love with her and pursues her. suhani at first believes that he is simply flirting with her but later, both realize that they love each other. however, aditya's rich lifestyle and suhani's middle-class lifestyle creates a rift between their parents. aditya and suhani elope and get married in a small ceremony. at first, they live in their respective homes and keep their marriage a secret. however, when a proposal comes for suhani's elder sister, the truth comes out. aditya and suhani then move to a dilapidated house and start their married life together.
soon, marital problems threaten to drive them apart. a misunderstanding causes suhani to think aditya is having an affair and they get into a major argument. suhani then gets involved in a car accident. as she is crossing the street, a car hits her, almost fatally injuring her. aditya has no idea of this and waits for her to return home, happily thinking that they will patch up.
later aditya realizes that suhani is missing and starts looking for her. it is revealed that savitri (tabu) is the one who hit suhani with her car. scared to own up, savitri calls her husband, who is an ias officer. her husband, yeshwant rao (shah rukh khan), arrives at the hospital and tells the doctor that suhani is his wife and he wants her operated. aditya finds out about the incident and reaches the hospital. suhani falls into a coma. yeshwant explains to aditya, and takes the blame and tells him that he had caused the accident. aditya threatens yeshwant and leaves. savitri meets aditya and tells him that it was she who caused the accident and she is feeling guilty.
the two shed tears together until yeshwant comes and picks her up. soon, suhani regains consciousness. aditya runs in and expresses the pain and suffering he went through in the hours of separation. suhani also expresses her own love and feelings for him. the film ends as aditya and suhani finally makeup and they hug each other on the hospital bed.


== cast ==
rani mukerji as dr. suhani sehgal (nee sharma)
vivek oberoi as aditya adi sehgal
shah rukh khan as yeshwant rao (cameo)
tabu as savitri rao (cameo)
sharat saxena as chandra prakash sharma, suhanis father
tanuja as shobhana sharma, suhanis mother
sandhya mridul as dina sharma, suhanis sister
satish shah as barrister om sehgal, adityas father
swaroop sampat as shanti sehgal, adityas mother
anju mahendru as prema
aditya srivastava as acp aditya singh rathore
rahul chauhan as cop rahul patil
shamita shetty in a special appearance in a song 'chori pe chori'
aarya mehta as pinky
ujjwal rana
karthik kumar


== soundtrack ==
there are 9 songs composed by a. r. rahman and lyrics by gulzar. a. r. rahman re-used all of his compositions from the soundtrack of the tamil film alaipayuthey, with the exception of two songs, "mere yaar mila de" and "naina milaike" which replaced their tamil counterparts "evano oruvan" and "alaipayuthey". the soundtrack turned out to be one of the strong points of the film. saathiya won most of the music awards, despite facing tough competition from devdas (2002). a. r. rahman and sonu nigam won best music and best male playback for "saathiya", respectively. according to the indian trade website box office india, with around 20,00,000 units sold, this film's soundtrack album was the year's second highest-selling, behind devdas.
all tracks are written by gulzar.


== awards ==
filmfare awardssaathiya won 6 awards at the filmfare awards.

best actress (critics) - rani mukerji
best music - a..r. rahman
best lyrics - gulzar for "saathiya"
best male playback - sonu nigam for "saathiya"
best dialogue - gulzar
best screenplay - mani ratnamzee cine awardszee cine award for best music director - a..r. rahman
zee cine award for best lyricist - gulzar for "saathiya"
zee cine award best playback singer- male - sonu nigam for "saathiya"
best sound - robert tayloriifaiifa best music director - a. r. rahman
iifa best male playback - sonu nigam for "saathiya"mtv immiesbest composer - a. r. rahman
best lyrics: gulzar for "saathiya"
best singer (male) - sonu nigam for "saathiya"bollywood music awardsbest male singer - sonu nigam for "saathiya"bollywood movie awardsbest actress (critics) - rani mukerji
best music director - a. r. rahmansansui awardsbest actress (jury) - rani mukerji
best music director - a. r. rahman
best male playback - sonu nigam for "saathiya"


== references ==


== external links ==
saathiya at imdb