saathi (transl.companion) is a 1991 indian hindi-language crime drama film directed by mahesh bhatt, written by robin bhatt and starring aditya pancholi, mohsin khan, varsha usgaonkar, and        soni razdan.  . anupam kher and paresh rawal portray the negative roles. this is aditya pancholi's biggest hit as a lead actor and established him in bollywood.


== plot ==
as children, suraj (aditya pancholi) and amar (mohsin khan) live a very poor life. one day, suraj's father steals a loaf of bread to feed suraj. after a few minutes, the baker arrives with a policeman and suraj's father is brutally beaten by the police inspector for stealing the bread. in this mishap, suraj's father is killed by the inspector. at his father's funeral, suraj decides that they will not remain hungry now and will feed themselves either by hook or crook.  both suraj and amar grow up to become small-time criminals. this leads them to the big gangster pasha (paresh rawal), who leads a big drug business. the drug business is actually owned by sultan, who is not seen by any of the gang members, including pasha. pasha only talks to sultan over the phone and hasn't seen sultan at all. suraj and amar part ways because amar hates gangland activities, especially drugs. suraj, on the other hand, wants to become rich. suraj kills pasha and becomes a big time gang leader. amar is terrified that suraj is lost in the world of crime and has forgotten humanity. in the climax of the movie, sultan  phones suraj and asks him to kill amar, to which he refuses. later that day, suraj is chased by the police (inspector kotwal had ordered inspector khan to do so) and is injured, while his bodyguard is killed. suraj reaches the place where amar and suraj used to live as children. amar, who felt the voice of his friend calling him, rushes to the place. inspector kotwal reaches there and amar tells him that suraj wishes to surrender. inspector kotwal reveals that he is actually sultan, the real gang leader and attempts to kill suraj. amar saves suraj and thinking that he had killed sultan, returns to suraj. just then, sultan, who didn't die, arrives at the scene and attempts to stab amar from behind. suraj, seeing him coming towards amar pushes amar away to protect him and is stabbed by sultan, who is finally killed by amar.


== cast ==
aditya pancholi... suraj
 mohsin khan.. amar
varsha usgaonkar... nisha
paresh rawal... pasha
anupam kher... inspector kotwal/sultan
homi wadia...inspector khan, kothwal's assistant
mushtaq khan... shetty
soni razdan... tina
avtar gill...sawant
raju shrestha....joe
anant jog...ragpicker and suraj father


== soundtrack ==
the songs of saathi were penned by sameer and the music composed by nadeem-shravan. "hui aankh nam aur" was the most popular song of the album, sung by anuradha paudwal. "zindagi ki talash mein" is also a hit song until the present day. other successful songs on the soundtrack are "yarana yaar ka" and "aaj hum tum o sanam". the songs were sung by kumar sanu, udit narayan, anuradha paudwal, jolly mukherjee, anwar, debashish dasgupta and vipin sachdeva.


== box office ==
the film was made on a budget of 35 million (us$490,000) and managed to succeed at the box office with a total gross of 95 million (us$1.3 million). the film would turn out to be lead actor aditya pancholi's only solid hit  as a lead actor in bollywood.


== references ==


== external links ==
saathi at imdb