saawan... the love season is a 2006 indian hindi-language romance film directed by saawan kumar, starring saloni aswani, kapil jhaveri, ranjeet, prem chopra and salman khan amongst others in pivotal roles. the title of the film was named after the director saawan kumar. this movie has many similarities with angelina jolie's 2002 starrer  life or something like it; even though there hasnt been any confirmation whether it was based on the latter. the film was a flop on the box office.


== plot ==
saawan... the love season tells the story of a couple, raj (kapil jhaveri) and kajal (saloni aswani). they get married, and when they come back from their honeymoon in patiala, kajal finds a man who predicts the future (salman khan). whether it's the death of a person at 9 p.m. or a major accident on the mumbai-pune expressway, the man knows it all. he's a modern-day nostradamus. when kajal asks him about her future, he tells her she'd die two days later. obviously, kajal is shattered, she tells raj who swears if anything happens to her, he would kill the nostradamus. on the fateful day, kajal is mistakenly shot by the cops outside a shopping mall and dies. raj blames the nostradamus for it, breaks into his house, bashes him black and blue and nostradamus dies. as nostradamus dies, he predicts his own death. when nostradamus dies, kajal, who is already pronounced dead, wakes up. she's alive now. she falls in love with raj all over again, and with the help of raj's friend funsukh (johny lever) and his admirer, the couple get remarried and they live happily ever after.


== cast ==
salman khan as nostradamus
saloni aswani as kajal kapoor
kapil jhaveri as raj
prem chopra as fakirchand kapoor
ranjeet as raj's dad
johnny lever as funsukh
bobby darling as funsukh's admirer
kiran rathod


== soundtrack ==
punjabi ankhonwali - shaan, sunidhi chauhan
tu mila de - sonu nigam  music composer sajidwajid
ready for love -  vasundhara das
saawan...... the love season - sunidhi chauhan, shaan
jo maangi khuda se - kunal ganjawala
mere dil ko dil ki dhadkan ko - shaan,  shreya ghoshal 


== references ==


== external links ==
saawan... the love season at imdb