sachein is a 2005 indian tamil-language romantic comedy film directed by john mahendran, and produced by kalaippuli s. thanu, starring vijay and genelia in lead roles, with bipasha basu, vadivelu, santhanam and raghuvaran appearing in supporting roles. the film marks bipasha's tamil debut.the score and soundtrack is composed by devi sri prasad. jeeva and v. t. vijayan handled the cinematography and editing respectively. the film released on 14 april 2005.the film was a commercial success. the movie ran for 200 days in theatres and was highly profitable for the producer.


== plot ==
sachein (vijay), a carefree and happy going guy joins a college in ooty and falls for shalini (genelia) immediately on seeing her in first sight. shalini studies in the same college as sachein and is considered a popular and beautiful student, while also being a short tempered and arrogant girl with an upper-middle class status. sachein comes to know all of this information about her from arnold aka ayyasamy (vadivelu), who is a guy that studies in the college for about nine years and keeps studying there because he thinks that students should give their respect to their college professors, while also informing sachein, that there are so many boys trying to impress her. this makes sachein take a different route and he starts mocking shalini in front of her, which irritates her. slowly, they both become good friends, after sachein saved her father in a bike accident. santhanam (santhanam), who is another student in the college also loves shalini. but, he feels jealous seeing her and sachein being good friends and decides to separate them. santhanam writes in one of the walls of the college, that sachein loves shalini and this angers shalini, as she misunderstands that sachein has done it. shalini shouts at sachein, but sachein informs shalini, that he is so outspoken and does not want to write in the college wall to convey his love, which makes shalini realize her mistake.
but to her surprise, sachein informs that, although he has not written it, but the content present on the wall is true which means that he is in love with shalini. this again angers shalini and she shouts at him that she considered him only as a good friend and that she wasn't in love with him. later, shalini overhears sachein challenging santhanam that shalini will convey her love within the next thirty days, as their college years will be completed by then. shalini challenges sachein that she will never fall in love with him.
manju (bipasha basu) is also from the same college and she likes sachein. shalini gets jealous when she spots sachein and manju together often. but manju informs shalini that sachein loves shalini so much and asks her not to hide her feelings, as it is very evident that shalini too likes sachein. this makes shalini realize her love towards sachein. sachein comes to know that shalinis parents have arranged a wedding for her and he meets shalini on the last day of their college and says that he has lost the challenge and he will be leaving ooty tomorrow. but shalini hides her feelings towards sachein and she plans to propose her love the next day as she wants to win the challenge by not conveying her love within the 30 days.
on the 31st day, shalini is excited and goes to propose sachein. but suddenly, she meets gowtham (raghuvaran) on the way, who is sacheins father. gowtham is a billionaire, in which this fact makes the entire college be surprised that sachein is the only son of a rich business tycoon, as sachein always stays very simple and down to earth. now shalini feels bad, that if she proposes her love towards sachein at this moment, then he might misunderstand that she decided to marry him after knowing that he is so rich and decides to stay calm. sachein leaves to the coimbatore international airport in coimbatore and shalini also follows him. in the airport, shalini could not control her emotions and proposes to sachein. she also revealed that it is her ego that didnt let her convey her love during the last thirty days. sachein feels so happy and the couple are united.


== cast ==


== production ==
shooting of this film commenced in ooty.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack features six songs composed by devi sri prasad, with lyrics written by pa. vijay, kabilan, na. muthukumar, v. elango, palani bharathi for the tamil version and sahithi, bhuvanachandra, vanamali and ponduri for the telugu version. vijay has sung a kuthu-number "vaadi vaadi" for this film. this was his last song as a playback singer, before rendering "google google" from thuppakki (2012), after a seven-year sabbatical. the album was released on 7 march 2005. the songs "vaadi vaadi", "dai dai dai kattikkoda", "kanmoodi thirakumbothu" and "gundu manga thoppukkulle" songs were became chartbusters upon its release.


=== track list ===
sachien(original track list)sachien(telugu version)ghamandee(hindi version)


== marketing ==
sunfeast biscuits involved in the film's promotion, which launched a special merchandise, featuring a few stills of vijay from the film.


== release ==
the film was released on 14 april 2005, coinciding with tamil new year, also clashing with the rajinikanth-starrer chandramukhi and kamal haasan-starrer mumbai xpress. the film was later dubbed into telugu under the same name and in hindi as ghamandee.the film was a profitable venture, in which the producer s. thanu recovered from his losses incurred from aalavandhan, and thanu wanted to give one crore extra salary from the profit to vijay, but the latter however refused.


== reception ==
behindwoods gave 3.5/5 praised vijay as "it is a cakewalk for vijay and his role has been etched out keeping his fans expectations in mind. his comedy track with vadivelu, who is his collegemate, is quite run-of-mill" and "vijay looks best in roles, which require him to portray tenderness. he wins the competition as the successful romantic hero of this generation of actors". the hindu stated `"sachein' is a movie that fans would watch for vijay alone" and said "vijay alone makes the movie extremely watchable".


== references ==