sagara sangamam (transl.confluence with ocean) is a 1983 indian telugu-language dance film written and directed by k. viswanath and produced by edida nageswara rao. the film stars kamal haasan, jaya prada, sarath babu, s. p. sailaja and chakri toleti. upon release, the film received positive reviews and became a box office hit. the film has received two national film awards, three filmfare awards south and the nandi award for best feature film (bronze). the film is listed among cnn-ibn's list of 100 greatest indian films of all time.the film was dubbed into tamil and malayalam and released as salangai oli and sagara sangamam respectively. kamal haasan had lent his voice for all three versions. the film was screened at the international film festival of india in 1984, retrospective in 2011 and celebrating dance in indian cinema section in 2014. the film was dubbed into russian, and was screened at the moscow international film festival, asia pacific film festival and aisfm film festival. salangai oli was released on the same day as sagara sangamam.


== plot ==
balakrishna (kamal haasan), fondly called balu, is an economically disadvantaged but multi-talented dancer, adept at the indian classical dances of kuchipudi, bharatanatyam, kathak, etc. his simple and very honest soul does not permit him to attain professional success in the commercial world that requires a certain level of moral laxness. madhavi (jaya prada), a wealthy young woman and a dance patron, notices his talent and acts as his benefactor, helping him secure an opportunity to participate in a high-level classical dance festival.
balu's aging mother passes away from the afflictions of poverty two days before the performance. balu, who was very attached to her, is emotionally devastated and fails to participate in the dance festival. madhavi nevertheless, gives him support and encouragement and sets him on the mend. balu gradually develops a fondness for madhavi as their relationship grows. he hides his love for her but eventually picks up the courage to express it. balu discovers that, while madhavi shares his feelings, she is a married woman separated from her husband. the husband later returns to unite madhavi and balu, but balu decides to sacrifice his love showing respect for the institution of marriage.
the years pass, and balu, a disappointed man, has become an inconsolable alcoholic and a newspaper journalist/art critic. meanwhile, madhavi's husband dies, and she hears about balu's condition. in a bid to revive his will to live and his passion for his art, she tends to his medical needs through his friend raghu (sarath babu) and solicits balu to be the dance master for her daughter, sailaja (sp sailaja).
the film ends with sailaja's stage performance with balu watching her in a wheelchair, his health had completely deteriorated, and he dies. raghu is seen taking him away quietly, without interrupting the performance. madhavi follows him with an umbrella covering balu from the rain.


== cast ==
kamal haasan as balakrishna "balu"
jaya prada as madhavi
sarath babu as ragupathy
s. p. sailaja as sailaja, madhavi's daughter
sakshi ranga rao as balu's uncle
dubbing janaki as balu's mother
chakri toleti as teen photographer
potti prasad as madhavi's servant
s. k. misro as film choreographer
manju bhargavi as classical dancer
geetha as dance assistant
mohan sharma as madhavi's husband


== production ==
kamal and r. c. sakthi wanted to make a film on a subject, about a dancer who was an alcoholic, which they named "anupallavi" when k. viswanath approached him with a similar subject, kamal felt he had to do the film. on the sets of the film, gopi krishna, one of the choreographers, insisted that kamal should train for at least a month. kamal was one of the top stars of the time, doing multiple shifts, and had to find the time. kamal said it was the "greatest sacrifice from my side". playback singer s. p. sailaja was recruited to play a prominent role, thereby making her debut as an actress and it also remains the only film she had acted in so far. k. viswanath who is related to sailaja, decided that she would fit perfectly in the role of kamal haasan's pupil, after seeing the photos. sailaja recalled: "i was reluctant as i was trained only in bharatanatyam, but in the film i had to perform other dance forms like kathak too. while shooting my introductory song "om namah shivaya" at ravindra bharathi, i became nervous on the stage and refused to act". chakri toleti did the role of a photographer boy in the film. thotta tharani said that the budget was drastically cut for the song in which kamal dances on the well.


== soundtrack ==
the film score and soundtrack was composed by ilaiyaraja. the lyrics for the telugu version were written by veturi sundararama murthy, while vairamuthu has written the lyrics for the tamil version and sreekumaran thampi for malayalam version. the song "vedam anuvanavuna" is based on hamsanandi raga. the song "om nama sivaya" is based on hindolam raga. the song "naada vinodam" is based on sriranjini raga. the song "balakanakamaya" is based on a thyagaraja kirtana and was composed on atana raga. the song "thakita thadimi" is based on shanmughapriya raga. both "mounamelanoyi ee marapurani reyi" and "vevela gopemmala" are based on mohana raga.


=== sagara sangamam (original soundtrack) ===
all lyrics are written by veturi sundararama murthy except where noted; all music is composed by ilaiyaraaja.


=== salangai oli (tamil soundtrack) ===
all lyrics are written by vairamuthu except where noted; all music is composed by ilaiyaraaja.


=== sagara sangamam (malayalam soundtrack) ===
all lyrics are written by sreekumaran thampi except where noted; all music is composed by ilaiyaraaja.


== release and reception ==
sagara sangamam was released on 3 june 1983. the film had a highly successful run in the theatres; it ultimately ended as a box-office success. it ran for 511 days at pallavi theatre in bangalore. tamil dubbing version salangai oli was released on the same day as sagara sangamam and successful run in the theatres. this is the first film that ran more than 100 days in 4 indian southern states of andhra, karnataka, tamil nadu and kerala respectively. the film is listed among cnn-ibn's list of 100 greatest indian films of all time.


== awards and recognitions ==
the film was screened at the international film festival of india in 1984. the film was dubbed into russian, and was screened at the moscow international film festival, asia pacific film festival and aisfm film festival.


== references ==


== external links ==
sagara sangamam at imdb