salaakhen is a 1998 indian hindi-language action film directed by guddu dhanoa. it stars  sunny deol and raveena tandon in pivotal roles. the movie did a good enough business thanks to the performances of only anupum kher & farida jalal at the box office & media suggested sunny deol to do roles like he did in movie called jeet 1996.


== plot ==
the film starts with scenes in which police is in search of vishal agnihotri (sunny deol) who is killer of four prominent personalities of the city. suddenly, vishal comes on the scene talking with a prominent lawyer. he deals with the lawyer to prove him innocent in the court for rs.100 million. according to the deal, the lawyer proves vishal innocent by presenting wrong witnesses wrongfully. when judge is about to announce the decision, vishal kills his lawyer and accepts his guilt of killing four people. the news spreads on media like a forest fire. an inquiry committee was constituted to see other side of picture in vishal's case. vishal appears before the committee and film goes back flash which was akandivli-based sachidanand agnihotri (anupam kher) is an honest school-teacher, who has always faced problems due to his honesty, first with poornima school; then in a government school, and now he has come forward to testify against the sexual assault and murder of a young woman from worli. sachidanand points an accusing finger at nagesh, the son of prominent and influential jaspal rana (amrish puri). sachidanand's family, which consists of his wife, gayetri (farida jalal) , and son, vishal, attempt in vain to talk him out of testifying. the police are forced to arrest nagesh and hold him in a cell. then the police, headed by a corrupt assistant commissioner of police, kamble, attempt to intimidate sachidanand and follow him everywhere under the pretext of protection. sachidanand is driven out of his mind, and on the day of the testimony, nagesh's lawyer, ashok pradhan, confuses him to such an extent that sachidanand kills himself. vishal, who is being held in prison for assaulting several policemen, breaks out, abducts nagesh, and then kills ashok pradhan. when kamble comes to nagesh's rescue, vishal kills both of them. he then hunts down jaspal rana and eventually kills him. the film comes in present. after listening vishal's story, the court hands vishal a sentence of 3 years to life imprisonment for which he tells the judge that don't appoint peoples like jaspal rana to be ministers so guy like him would have to take the law into their own hands.


== cast ==
sunny deol as vishal s. agnihotri
raveena tandon as neha g. rao
anupam kher as sachidanand agnihotri
farida jalal as gayatri s. agnihotri
amrish puri as jaspal rana
mahavir shah as acp kamble
mohan joshi as advocate ashok pradhan
deven verma as giri rao
dinesh hingoo as badri
harish patel as panteshwar
ravi patwardhan as advocate khurana
manisha koirala as an item number "pichhu pade hai"


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
salaakhen at imdb