sanam teri kasam (transl.swear on you, my beloved) is a 2016 indian romantic tragedy film, starring harshvardhan rane and mawra hocane. it is directed by the duo radhika rao-vinay sapru and produced by deepak mukut. the film is a modern rendition of the novel love story by eric segal. the film was released worldwide on 5 february 2016 under the production banner of eros now.


== plot ==
saraswati "saru" parthasaarthy (mawra hocane) is an extremely traditional, young librarian, who gets rejected by many suitors who find her "old-fashioned" and "unappealing". her younger sister kaveri's fianc issues her an ultimatum to marry him within a month or else move on. but her strict father, jayram parthasarthy (manish choudhary) says that her wedding cannot happen till saru gets married. enraged, kaveri insults her and threatens to elope. saru begs her not to elope and hurt their father, and promises kaveri that she will find a husband soon.
in the same building, lives inder lal parihaar (harshvardhan rane), a handsome ex-convict and his fashionista girlfriend, renowned stylist ruby malhotra (shraddha das). jayram views them as a bad influence to the society as he finds them embarrassing. after a few days, however, they break-up. when saru's parents are out of town, saru secretly meets inder and seeks help to get her a makeover appointment from ruby. she wants to impress her office crush abhimanyu who holds a degree in iit. during their conversation, a drunken ruby barges in and presumes inder to be cheating on her. in a fit of rage, she insults saru and throws her wine bottle on saru and leaves, but inder shields her and gets badly injured . saru helps inder to his bed while the watchman approaches inder's apartment and misunderstands the scene of them having a physical relationship and alerts all the elders of the society. unaware, saru helps inder tend to his wounds despite his reluctance. jayram returns early from his trip. he and the elders, find saru with inder on his bed, completely misunderstanding the situation, while jayram disowns her.
saru tells her mother what really happened that night, but asks her not to tell her father, because he has finally consented for kaveri's wedding. inder helps her find an apartment and also get her a makeover. with her new makeover, she grabs the attention of abhimanyu. meanwhile, inder falls in love with her, but keeps quiet when abhimanyu proposes to her, because he wants her to be happy. however, abhimanyu rejects her on the day of the wedding, because his father does not want a disowned daughter-in-law. saru is left heartbroken and goes to her honeymoon suite. from there, saru and inder spend time together. the next morning, inder witnesses saru embracing abhimanyu and leaves heartbroken. inder spirals into depression, breaking off all contacts with saru. when he learns from abhimanyu that saru had actually rejected abhimanyu's request for a second chance, he tracks her down and finds her in a buddhist monastery, where he professes his love to her. saru passes out and inder takes her to the hospital, where he discovers she is suffering from meningioma. he forcibly enters saru's parents' house and demands them to stop pretending that their daughter is dead. the next day he is arrested for charges pressed by jayram. saru gets discharged and goes to the library, where she discovers the secret messages inder left for her in check-out slips, realizing that he has loved her from the beginning. the two unite and saru asks inder to marry her.
that night, saru tells him that after her death, she desires to be buried under a beautiful flowering tree. inder meets jayram and tells him that he is marrying saru and can even die for her. on their wedding day, saru's parents arrive and accept their wedding. saru faints after the wedding and gets hospitalised. her parents learn about her disease, and jayram feels heartbroken and guilty. inder asks his father, rajinder lal parihar (sudesh berry), with whom he has a strained relationship, to acquire for him the land under the tree for saru's burial. saru dies in inder's arms, and inder is left heartbroken. inder finds rajinder in the hospital and reconciles with him.
now a successful lawyer, inder stands at the tree that marks saru's grave. he asserts that she must be happy to see him successful and sober. he says that he misses her and expresses a promise of eternal true love.


== cast ==
harshvardhan rane as inder parihaar
mawra hocane as saraswati "saru" parthasaarthy/ saraswati inder parihaar
manish choudhary as jayram parthasaarthy, saru's father
pyumori mehta as arundhati parthasaarthy
divyetta singh as kaveri parthasaarthy, saru's sister
anurag sinha as abhimanyu shastry, saru's friend and later fianc
murli sharma as inspector hari nikam
shraddha das as ruby malhotra
vijay raaz as mushtaqeen bhai
sudesh berry as rajinder lal parihaar, inder's father
ravii sharma as pandit
krishna rathod
alok pandey as watchman


== release ==
a first look of the film was unveiled on 7 december 2015 by eros now via a tweet and was scheduled for release on 8 january 2016. trailer of the film was released on 15 december 2015 with a new release date of 5 february. film was released worldwide on 5 february 2016 under the production banner of eros now. upon release, the film received mixed reviews.


== soundtrack ==
the songs were composed by himesh reshammiya. lyrics were penned by sameer anjaan, shabbir ahmed, reshammiya and subrat sinha. the title track was released on 22 december 2015, and complete album was released on 7 january 2016.

all music is composed by himesh reshammiya.


== box office ==
the film grossed approximately 12.5 million (us$180,000) on the first day of release, 46.6 million (us$650,000) on the weekend and( 3.4million) in the first week. the film was declared by trade publications as an average grosser at the box office.


== references ==


== external links ==
sanam teri kasam at imdb
sanam teri kasam at bollywood hungama
sanam teri kasam at rotten tomatoes