sangili bungili kadhava thorae (lit.'sangili bungili, open the door') is a 2017 indian tamil-language horror comedy film written and directed by ike, and produced by fox star studios and atlee under his production house 'a for apple productions'. the film stars jiiva, sri divya, and soori in the leading roles while radha ravi, raadhika sarathkumar, and thambi ramaiah play supporting roles. featuring music composed by vishal chandrasekhar, the film began production during march 2016 and was released on 19 may 2017. it was dubbed in hindi as sangili bungli darwaza khol.


== plot ==
vasu (jiiva) is a house broker who sells houses by using tricks with his friend sooranam (soori). vasu and his mother parvathy (raadhika) are living in her brother's (ilavarasu) house for rent. vasu and his parents had lived in houses for rent throughout their lives. after vasu's father's (uday mahesh) death, he took a vow of buying a bungalow on the outskirts.
after some years, vasu buys the bungalow and enters the house with his whole family. he later finds that there was a family that had lived there earlier. jambulingam (thambi ramaiah) lived there with his wife (devadarshini), mother, and daughters. he refused to move out of the house, so vasu decides to live there until he finds the owner who cheated him. vasu and jambulingam's daughter shwetha (sri divya) fall in love with each other. vasu and sooranam try some ghost tricks to chase jambulingam's family out of the house.
on coming to know of vasu and shwetha, vasu's aunt (senthikumari) gets angry as she has been under the belief that her daughter sandhya (madhumila) and vasu will marry. she goes on a tirade about vasu's actions to parvathy. parvathy tells vasu to apologize to his aunt. he refuses, and his family moves out of the house. while vasu and sooranam threaten jambulingam's deaf and dumb mother with a ghost, she sees a real ghost and is admitted in the hospital. jambulingam blames vasu for threatening his mother with ghosts and shows a video taken in the phone unknowingly. shwetha also fights with vasu, and the family moves out of the house.
vasu brings e. b. rajeshwari (kovai sarala) to know about the ghost. sangili aandavar (radha ravi) lived in the house and was killed by his family members for the house. she tells that if the two families live happily in the house, aandavar will go out of the house. they live in the house happily, but jambulingam does not like to stay there. he brings his family out and locks vasu's family inside, but when he turns, he comes to know that he is inside the house and all others are outside. aandavar takes jambulingam, but the whole family tries to rescue jambulingam by showing strength and unity. on seeing this, aandavar leaves the house, and vasu lives in the house with his mother, shwetha, and the whole family.


== cast ==


== production ==
in december 2015, jiiva announced that he would work on a new film to be directed by newcomer ike, an erstwhile assistant of kamal haasan. raja rani productions atlee would work on the film as the producer alongside fox star studios, while sridivya would play the lead female role. jiiva revealed that he shared a good comfort level with both ike and atlee, who he had worked with during the making of nanban (2012). he further stated that the film would be reminiscent of the horror comedy films earlier made by director priyadarshan.the film began production during march 2016 with the first schedule held in pazhani. the title of the film, sangili bungili kadhava thorae (name of a song from muni 2: kanchana) was also unveiled during the first schedule. actors jai and akshara gowda appeared in cameo roles as a nri couple in the film, and shot for the film during the first week of the shoot.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by vishal chandrasekhar, while the film's audio rights are secured by sony music.


== references ==


== external links ==
sangili bungili kadhava thorae at imdb