santosham (transl. happiness) is a 2002 indian telugu-language comedy drama film directed by dasaradh who co-wrote the film with gopimohan and trivikram srinivas. it stars nagarjuna akkineni, prabhu deva, gracy singh (her telugu debut) and shriya saran. the music was composed by r. p. patnaik. 
released on 9 may 2002, the film was well received by critics and successful at the box office. it was dubbed in tamil as santhosha vanille and in hindi as pehli naazar ka pehla pyaar. the film was remade in bengali as bandhan and in kannada as ugadi. 


== plot ==
karthik is a rich architect in ooty. he falls in love with padmavathi "padhu". padhu is hesitant to accept and reciprocate karthik's love, as she doesn't know what kind of a person he is. padmavathi has a younger cousin named bhanu. bhanu encourages their love and gives courage to padhu's feelings. when padhu reveals her love, her father rama chandraiah enraged, resists and asks her to marry the guy he has chosen for her, causing padhu to elope marry karthik.
padmavathi is very eager to get back to her parents and get their blessings. karthik and padmavathi migrate to new zealand and they give birth to a kid named lucky. padhu unfortunately dies in an accident. rama chandraiah has a very big joint family. a few of the family members opine that inviting karthik and his kid for a marriage to happen at their place would give an opportunity to get a closer look at lucky. when karthik visits rama chandraiah's place he gets mixed responses from different people in the house. rama chandraiah doesn't like karthik and others like him. over a period of time, karthik impresses them all and when he was about to go back to new zealand, rama chandraiah expresses his repentance for whatever happened and says that he is accepting karthik as his son-in-law. bhanu has fallen in love with karthik. she meets karthik, a widower now. she still has feelings for him. but at the same time, there is pawan - a childhood friend of bhanu - who is deeply in love with her. karthik returns to new zealand. bhanu along with pawan visits karthik. during that period, bhanu gets closer to karthik. when karthik realizes the intentions of bhanu, he fixes pawan as the fiance for her. now bhanu is about to marry pawan. bhanu loves karthik, but karthik hesitates to repeat the history by marrying a girl against the wishes of her family. just as karthik is about to leave for good with his son, rama chandraiah stops him from leaving and pleads him to marry bhanu. also, pawan comes and pleads karthik to marry bhanu as he can tell that bhanu is not happy about the marriage. the film has a happy ending with karthik and bhanu marrying.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by r. p. patnaik. music released on supreme music company.


== awards ==
this film won nandi awards for the best actor & best film categories.
this film won filmfare best film award in telugu, for 2002
r. p. patnaik won the filmfare best music director award


== external links ==
santosham at imdb