saravanan irukka bayamaen (transl. 'why fear when saravanan is here?') is a 2017 indian tamil-language supernatural comedy film written and directed by ezhil, starring udhayanidhi stalin, regina cassandra and srushti dange. the film began production in july 2016 and was released on 12 may 2017.


== plot ==
saravanan (udhayanidhi stalin) is a jobless youth who roams around in a two-wheeler with his friends. kalyanam decides to be the head of a famous political party called dho jindhagi. however, when a drunk photographer incorrectly takes some photos, kalyanam is targeted by the police. with the help of saravanan, he goes to dubai and it is eventually revealed that kalyanam had to take care of camels in dubai. after kalyanam leaves for dubai, saravanan's friends over exaggerate about saravanan to the head of dho jindhagi, who appoints saravanan as head. 2 years later, saravanan's other uncle and their family come to visit. thenmozhi, saravanan's cousin comes too and demands his house( which is now a party office) to be cleaned before she comes. it is revealed that saravanan and thenmozhi were schoolmates and were always fighting, until thenmozhi left town.
saravanan does not have any other place to start the party office as he had earlier used thenmozhi's house for that purpose and kalyanam's wife gives their new house to him without kalyanam's  knowledge and when he arrives, he is shocked. he takes saravanan to be his enemy and along with thenmozhi, plans to take revenge. various hilarious situations are witnessed and meanwhile, thenmozhi gets engaged to the son of veerasingam who is kind of immature. this hurts saravanan who had fallen in love with thenmozhi. in many incidents, thenmozhi is seen to act supportive to saravanan though she hates him, shocking others. it is later revealed that she is possessed by the ghost of fathima, a muslim girl who was in love with sarvanan but had died due to an accident. saravanan enjoys life with thenmozhi as fathima. but when the family comes to know about this, they get angry on saravanan for cheating them. what saravanan does to reunite with thenmozhi by convincing his family and breaking her marriage with veerasingam's son, forms the crux of the story.


== cast ==


== production ==
in july 2016, udhayanidhi stalin revealed that he would produce and act in a new comedy film to be directed by ezhil whose previous was velainu vandhutta vellaikaaran. regina cassandra and srushti dange joined the film as lead actresses in late july 2016 and the film began production thereafter. actor soori has been roped in this project to take care of comedy. the film was officially titled as saravanan irukka bayamaen in september 2016, with a first look poster of the film released.


== release ==
this film was released on 12 may 2017.


== soundtrack ==
after manam kothi paravai, desingu raja, and vellaikaara durai, d. imman collaborates with director ezhil for the fourth time and his first collaboration with actor udhayanidhi stalin. the soundtrack contains five songs which were written by yugabharathi. imman has composed tunes for some peppy numbers. k. g. venkatesh has handled the camera.


=== track list ===
all lyrics are written by yugabharathi.the song "marhaba aavona" rendered by shreya ghoshal was not a part of the film although the song was a hit. shreya ghoshal got both critical and commercial acclaim for the soulful rendition. the song was used by various television serials as a background song. one it was played in the popular soap opera iniya iru malargal(kumkum bhagya-dubbed version)


== references ==


== external links ==
saravanan irukka bayamaen at imdb