sardar papa rayudu is a 1980 telugu-language historical fiction film, produced by kranthi kumar in the sri annapoorna international banner and directed by dasari narayana rao. it stars n. t. rama rao, sridevi and sharada, with music composed by chakravarthy. the film was remade in hindi as sarfarosh (1985).


== plot ==
a sincere police officer ramu (n. t. rama rao) and vijaya (sridevi), are in love. vijaya's father, dharmaraju (rao gopala rao), is a corrupt politician who fakes the good gentleman image outside. he, along with two more guys named satya murthy (satyanarayana) and nyayapathi (allu ramalingaiah), exploited the poor by joining hands with the british. when dharmaraju meets ramu with his daughter, he immediately goes back to his past. dharmaraju, satya murthy, and nyayapathi kill a king, vijayaraghavaraju (prabhakar reddy), in the andaman islands and throw the crime over a sincere gentleman and a great freedom fighter, sardar paparayudu (again n. t. rama rao). sardar paparayudu gets a life sentence. the reason why dharmaraju is shocked seeing ramu is that the latter exactly resembles sardar paparayudu in facial features. in fact, ramu is the son of sardar paparayudu. ramu's mother, seeta (sharada), is the wife of sardar paparayudu. right from then, dharmaraju gets terrified, and to make things worse for him, sardar paparayudu gets released from jail as a result of reducing the imprisonment. he decides to take revenge on dharmaraju for wrongly imprisoning him, and a rift starts between him and his son ramu. the film ends on a happy note, with justice eventually winning.


== cast ==
n. t. rama rao in a dual role as sardar paparayudu and ram "ramu" mohan
sri devi as vijaya
sharada as seeta
rao gopal rao as dharma rao
satyanarayana as satya murthy
allu ramalingaiah as nyayapathi
mohan babu as britisher
gummadi as baba
prabhakar reddy as vijaya raghava raju
tyagaraju as british inspector
k. v. chalam as raju
p. j. sarma as i.g.
chalapathi rao as sardar paparayudu's henchmen
pandari bai as sardar paparayudu's mother
s. varalakshmi as urmila devi
athili lakshmi as vijaya's mother
jyothi lakshmi in an item number


== soundtrack ==
the film has a musical score by chakravarthy. sri sri, rajashri, and dasari narayana rao penned the lyrics. the song jyothilakshmi was added to the film after the 50 days of its release.


== references ==


== external links ==
sardar papa rayudu at imdb