sarvopari palakkaran is a 2017 malayalam film directed by venugopan. the film features anoop menon, aparna balamurali and anu sithara in the lead roles.


== plot ==
jose kaithaparambil mani (anoop menon) is from pala but works as a circle-inspector of police in thrissur. he is engaged to a college going student linda (anu sithara). being a man with cultural values, he expects his would be to be a traditional type. while his father (alencier ley lopez), who is a bar manager and friend joymon try to ensure that linta is the perfect match for jose.
a bangladeshi lady, naina, who was kept in custody and severely molested by mani swami, somehow manages to escape and reach police. police then starts their hunt for mani swami. however mani swami cleverly escapes leaving the black mark on police. naina was placed in a shelter home and there she spends her time in painting and writing poems.
anupama is a social worker and drama artist. c.i jose happens to see anupama walking alone to her hostel at midnight 12:30 a.m on the road and stops her. though she insisted that she will walk to her hostel, jose stops her. when an auto comes, she refrain to enter the auto citing the reason that the auto driver is a stranger. this enrages jose and he puts her into police custody. when his sub-ordinates at the police station identifies anupama as the one who created news during the "kiss of love" protest, they suggest jose to free her, as keeping her in custody will create more problems in the morning. anupama firmly says that she has to be dropped at the hostel by c.i jose. when s.i rameshan persuades, jose agrees and drops her at her p.g.
mani swami again lands in thrissur, however he attacks and injures a police officer and escapes. besides running behind mani swami, jose and anupama meet at various circumstances, and once jose even takes her into custody for immoral traffic. this became a social issue, and jose was suspended by asp chandra sivakumar for creating such a problem. he was also taken off from naina's case. but as time passes by jose and anupama become closer. mani swami still carries out his process of transporting young girls to other countries.
asp chandra sivakumar calls jose for a personal meeting at her flat. jose uses the opportunity to invite her for his wedding with linta. he was shocked to hear that anupama is having calls with mani swami having very short durations. he is then reassigned to naina's case to trap mani . he follows anupama to goa where he realises she is meeting up with mani swami . anupama talks to mani swami and claims she want in on the prostitution ring . when they meet up laterthat night mani swami tries to seduce anupama only for anupama to bring out the shocking revelation that hes her father . a shocked mani swami begs for her forgives ness while being taken away by police . later anupama reveals to jose that she has feeings for him . she gives him one last hug and boards a bus while jose whos still engaged to linda stares lovingly as she rides off .


== cast ==
anoop menon as c.i jose mani chakko
aparna balamurali as anupama neelakanthan
anu sithara as linta jose
gayathri arun as asp chandra sivakumar
vijayakumar
chali pala as s i rameshkumar
manju satheesh
balu varghese as joymon
nandhu as mani swami
alencier ley lopez as mani chako
roshan basheer
manuraj as s i paulose
manju sunichen
nithin susheel
reneesha rehman


== production ==
anoop menon signed into play the male lead along with miya and honey rose . nandhu signed into play the main antagonist role. television actress gayathri arun who is well known for portraying police officer in tv series parasparam signed into play an important character which is also a police officer role will mark her debut in malayalam cinema.
in late 2016, aparna balamurali replaced honey rose and  anu sithara replaced the later citing date issues.


== reception ==
the times of india rated the film with 2.5 stars, saying the film doesnt live up to its premise.


== references ==


== external links ==
sarvopari palakkaran at imdb