satya harishchandra is a 1965 indian telugu-language hindu mythological film, based on the life of harishchandra, produced and directed by k. v. reddy under the vijaya productions banner. it stars n. t. rama rao and s. varalakshmi, with music composed by pendyala nageswara rao. k. v. reddy produced the film simultaneously in kannada with the same title, starring rajkumar.


== plot ==
satya harishchandra (n. t. rama rao) is a ruler of ayodhya belongs to suryavasam, he is one among the six kings who ruled the earth like heaven and performed a hundred rajasuya yagas, whose path of life is always the truth. once in indra's (mikkilineni) court, maharshi vishwamitra (mukkamala) had a confrontation with maharshi vashista (chittor v. nagaiah) that he will divert harishchandra's path of truth. in the beginning, asks a huge amount, without any hesitation, harishchandra agrees. vishwamitra asks to keep it with him as his property. then he creates wild animals which creates trouble when harishchandra moves for the protection of people to the forest. there he creates two beautiful women called matanga kanyalu (rajasri & meena kumari), tries to lure harishchandra and also threatens either to marry the girls or leave the kingdom. harishchandra gives away his kingdom when vishwamitra asks to repay the amount. here harishchandra asks some time, viswamitra gives a month and accompanies his assistant nakshatraka (ramana reddy). on the way, viswamitra keeps many tests to harishchandra but he stands on his true path. after reaching kaasi, he observes that people are sold in the market. due to the shortage of time, on his wife chandramathi's (s. varalakshmi) advice, he sells her along with his son lohitha. lord kaasi vishwanath (m. prabhakar reddy) buys them in the form of kaalakoushika (relangi). after that, nakshatraka asks him to pay his travel expenses for which he sells himself to veerabahu (rajanala), king of the graveyard. now harishchandra starts working as a watchman to the burial ground and chandramathi & lohitha as slaves in kaalakoushika's house. one day, unfortunately, lohitha dies due to snake bite while chandramathi is performing his funeral, harischandra stops and asks her to pay the fee without knowing her identity. but she doesn't have anything to pay then he indicates her golden wedding chain when she recognizes him as her husband because her wedding chain is invisible to others. in such pathetic situations also harishchandra did not yield. chandramathi rushes to get the money from her owner. at the same time, viswamitra creates an illusion that chadramathi has kidnapped and killed kaasiraju's son. the king gives the death sentence to her and sends her to harishchandra to execute it. even then he does not leave his true path and executes the punishment. suddenly, viswamitra, vashita & lord shiva appear. finally, viswamitra accepts his defeat before harishchandra and by the blessings of lord siva, he gets back his kingdom.


== cast ==
n. t. rama rao as harishchandra
s. varalakshmi as chandramathi
chittoor v. nagaiah as maharshi vasishtha
mukkamala as brahmarshi vishwamitra
rajanala as veerabahudu
relangi as kalakoushikudu
ramana reddy as nakshatrakudu
mikkilineni as indra
prabhakar reddy as lord siva
chadalavada as auctioneer
raja babu as kalakoushikudu's disciple
balakrishna as kalakoushikudu's disciple
nalla ramamurthy as kalakoushikudu's disciple
ramakoti as kalakoushikudu's disciple
a. v. subbarao jr. as satyakeerthi
girija as kalahakanthi
l. vijayalakshmi as menaka
vanisri as matangi
rajasree as matanga kanya
meena kumari as matanga kanya
mohana as queen of kashi
sabita devi as goddess parvathi
master babu as lohitasyudu


== soundtrack ==
music composed by pendyala nageswara rao. lyrics were written by pingali nagendra rao. music released by emi columbia audio company.


== see also ==
list of hindu mythological films


== references ==


== external links ==
satya harishchandra at imdb