house of the dead: scarlet dawn is a horror-themed rail shooter arcade game developed by sega interactive, and is the fifth title in the house of the dead series, following the release of the house of the dead 4 in 2005.
it was scheduled for location testing on january 1921, 2018 in akihabara, japan. it was later released on all arcades of japan in september 2018, and was released in the united states through dave & buster's locations in october 2018.


== plot ==
in 2006, three years after the events of the house of the dead 4, kate green joins forces with ryan taylor, the brother of her late partner and mentor, james, on an undercover mission in a dinner event within scarecrow manor, located in the outskirts of an unnamed state in the new england region of the united states. the manager unleashes his army of mutant creatures upon the dinner guests. realizing the threat to the world, kate and ryan then begin their quest to stop the manager and the outbreak he started.
as they progress through the mansion, they find clues related to the personnel of the dbr corporation; dr. roy curien, caleb goldman, and a mysterious man which kate identifies as thornheart, a descendant of the corporation's founding members, as well as the manager of scarecrow manor. also during their exploration of the mansion, they fight gigantic mutants, such as resurrected creatures from the 1998 curien mansion incident, chariot and hangedman, as well as a new squid-like creature called the priestess.
after escaping the crumbling mansion, kate and ryan fight their way through the zombies to a nearby church, where they meet thornheart, who is revealed to be still alive. he reveals himself to be the mastermind of the game's events, and tells the agents that the corporation's purpose is to "cleanse" the world of its current status and "reshape" it in their own way. he then sets loose his masterpiece, the moon, a tree-like behemoth which has abilities similar to that of the sun from the third game and the world from the fourth, in addition of being able to control wind. they fight it as it gradually became the shape of a humanoid and the size of a 20-story building. ryan then tries to kill it in a desperate attempt by stabbing an iron rod through its head. this, at first, proves unsuccessful, but then a lightning bolt strikes the rod impaled through the moon's head, thus electrocuting and killing it.
the next morning, kate and ryan rest as they watch the sun rise while the former recalls james's motto to never lose hope and keep fighting to the end.
there are four endings, depending on which location the player(s) choose one after the other. unlike the previous games it does not include the zombified ending.


== characters ==
ryan taylor: james taylor's brother who joins kate to solve the scarecrow manor case.
kate green: james taylor's former partner who joins ryan to solve the scarecrow manor case.
thornheart: the manager of scarecrow manor who unleashes his army of creatures upon the guests. he is also revealed to be the "mystery man" from the house of the dead iii and the house of the dead 4.


== bosses ==
the chariot (returning from the house of the dead)
the priestess
the hanged man (returning from the house of the dead)
the moon


== references ==


== external links ==
official japanese website