school dance is a 2014 american musical comedy-drama film directed, co-written, and produced by nick cannon. the film stars bobb'e j. thompson, mike epps, luenell, kristina debarge, katt williams, tiffany haddish, george lopez, and wilmer valderrama. the film was released on july 2, 2014, in select theaters, vod, and digital hd. it is cannon's directoral feature film debut.


== plot ==
the film opens with a news broadcast about a teenager named jason jackson being shot outside of the monte vista high school dance lock-in. jason tells the story from the beginning, starting with him trying to get into the most popular dance clique in school, the ranger$ (langston higgins, julian goins, and dashawn blanks). they say he has to pass the initiation of getting a pair of panties from one of the sweet gyrls by midnight. jason then decides that he is going to attempt to get a pair of panties from his longtime crush anastacia during the school's lock-in.
meanwhile, day day, one of the ranger$ and jason's older cousin owes anastacia's eldest brother junior $2,000 by midnight due to day day's father darren telling junior that day day would have his money after losing to him in a game of dominoes. in his english class, jason gives anastacia a poem he wrote about her after she forgets to do the homework assignment expect the teacher makes her read it in front of the class which everyone including anastacia finds to be very great. after school is over, anastacia gives jason her number so they can write a song together sometime.
another subplot of the film follows two police officers officer p'eniss and lagney, who are chasing down the new boyz who are on their way to the lock-in but get caught with weed brownies and "grape juice", which officer lagney consumes.
at the school dance lock-in, jason, anastacia, the ranger$, and sweet gyrls play "7 minutes in heaven", but when it is jason and anastacia's turn, she tells him that she already knows his plan and they decide to just stay friends. they later compete in a talent show to win $2,000 but when it comes to the ranger$' performance, jason finally beats his fear and raps to help them win the money. however, the sweet gyrls end up winning the prize money.
at midnight, jason and the ranger$ meet the eses in the parking lot and are about to be killed until the wannabe gangsters start a drive-by shooting. jason saves anastacia, but is shot in the process. jason is sent to the hospital and anastacia goes with him, becomes his girlfriend, and gives flaco the $2,000 prize money.
the film ends with jason's mother, mamma tawanna, coming into the parking lot with a gun, trying to figure out who shot jason and breaks the fourth wall by showing nick, the producers, and the crew then her shouting out at the audience.


== cast ==
bobb'e j. thompson as jason jackson
juliann alexander as julian
langston higgins as langston
dashawn blanks as darren jr. (day day)
luenell as mamma tawanna jackson
mike epps as principal rogers
george lopez as oscar
katt williams as darren
wilmer valderrama as flaco
tiffany haddish as trina
kristinia debarge as anastacia
lil duval as bam-bam
affion crockett as coach fontaine
amber rose as marywanna
efren ramirez as el matador
patrick warburton as prairie puff man
kevin hart as og lil' pretty thug (uncredited)
new boyz as themselves
melissa molinaro as tequila
kayla collins as big booty becky
jim breuer as officer lagney
vivian kindle as mrs. johnson
jessica kirson as officer p'eniss
nick cannon as super sizer/juicy/himself
dj d-wrek as himself
pete davidson as stinkfinger


== home media ==
school dance was released on dvd on october 7, 2014.


== references ==


== external links ==
school dance at imdb
school dance at rotten tomatoes