school for secrets (also known as secret flight) is a 1946 british black-and-white film written and directed by peter ustinov and starring ralph richardson. in leading supporting roles were david tomlinson, raymond huntley, finlay currie, richard attenborough, john laurie and michael hordern. based on a 1942 raf training film for would-be 'boffins' and developed with the full cooperation of the air ministry, the film celebrates the discovery of radar, its discoverers and the enabling culture.


== plot ==
school for secrets tells the story of the "boffins" - research scientists - who discovered and developed radar and helped avoid the german invasion of britain in 1940. five scientists, led by professor heatherville (ralph richardson), are brought together to work in secrecy and under pressure to develop the device. their dedication disrupts their family lives as they are forced to sacrifice everything to make a breakthrough. their success is illustrated by the effect radar has on the fighting abilities of the raf over the skies of britain in the summer and autumn months of 1940. however, germany is also planning its own radar capability and british commandos are dispatched to strike a german installation. the scientists complete their work just in time for the d-day.


== messages ==
the film only represent events and characters in the most general way. it ostensibly celebrates the boffins, but c.p. snow and the raf come out of it well, particularly in the terms of recruitment, leadership,  the 'sunday soviets' and more generally collaboration between scientists of different backgrounds, between boffins and the services, and between the more technical officers and the more familiar 'officer and gentleman' types. the boffins with technically relevant specialities are represented as having technocratic tendencies, requiring careful handling. solly zuckermann is represented as a key character. as a zoologist he is a respected scientist who shares the initial ignorance of the raf on electronics, and thus provides a vital bridge between cultures. reference is made to his previous work on 'the social life of monkeys and apes'. the difference between german and british practice is well illustrated, where open bickering is more productive than sullen compliance. it is such aspects, rather than historical or technical details, that the film strives to put across.


== cast ==
ralph richardson as professor heatherville
raymond huntley as professor laxton-jones
john laurie as dr. mcvitie
ernest jay as dr. dainty
david tomlinson as mr. watlington
finlay currie as sir duncan wills
norman webb as dr. wainwright
michael hordern as lieutenant commander lowther
lana morris (credited as pamela matthews) as mrs. watlington
joan haythorne as mrs. laxton-jones
joan young as mrs. mcvitie
ann wilton as mrs. dainty
richard attenborough as jack arnold
marjorie rhodes as mrs. arnold
david hutcheson as squadron leader sowerby
patrick waddington as group captain aspinall
cyril smith as flight sergeant cox
james hayter as r.a.f. technical officer
robert wyndham as commando major
andrew blackett as commando captain
bill owen as commando nco
paul carpenter as flt. lt. argylle


== critical reception ==
tv guide wrote, "as would be expected from young writer-director ustinov (he was 25 years old at the time), a nice sense of humour is integrated into the proceedings, a refreshing change from the deadly serious propaganda films that dominated the screen at the time. unfortunately, portions of school for secrets are too talky and tend to drag on past the point of interest, but the action scenes are excitingly handled and manage to keep the narrative aloft", while britmovie called the film a "sprightly melodrama. with its starry cast of character actor and witty dialogue, ustinov focuses more on the diverse characters than scientific advances."


== references ==


== external links ==
school for secrets at imdb
review of film at variety