second show is a 2012 indian malayalam-language action crime film directed by srinath rajendran and
written by vini vishwa lal. the film, set in the backdrop of criminal gangs of varied varieties in kerala, tells the story of young hari who rises from an illicit sand miner to a smuggling baron in a short time. it stars debutante actors dulquer salmaan, sunny wayne and  gauthami nair with a supporting cast such as rohini, baburaj and sudesh berry.


== plot ==
the film proceeds as the flashback of an ex-convict hari (dulquer salmaan) narrated to a man he meets at a bus stop on a rainy night. it is revealed that hari (whose nickname is lalu) is a poor young man who works for the local sand mafia as a driver. he is friends with kurudi (sunny wayne) whose real name is nelson mandela pp. one day while at work, kurudi draws lalu to a fight leaving the sand smugglers without a driver that causes them to get caught by the police. now jobless, lalu and kurudi join the group of chaver vavachan (baburaj), who is a financier, and take up the job of retrieving vehicles for non-repayment of loans.
chaver vavachan is the younger brother of a notorious former goon 'chaver antony' who dies due to a cracker burst by a young lad. vavachan swears revenge and, after a wait of long 25 years, vavachan finds the lad (who is now a man) at a hospital and bursts crackers on him. but because of unfortunate for vavachan, he killed one of the henchmen of vishnubuddhan (sudesh berry), an influential smuggler. impressed by his courage, vishnubuddhan takes lalu into his gang. during one of vishnubuddhan's deals, lalu is betrayed by vikidan, one of  his friends and vishnubuddhan mistakes lalu for making away with the goods. vishnubuddhan's son and friends severely thrash lalu. when he is admitted in a hospital by his friends, one of his friend receives a call from sachi, one of buchan's henchmen and a constable of police. he is forced to move away from. after riding far long, he and his friends reaches in his another friend saidu's house. there he lives with his friends by owning a tea shop. on the next day his friend kurudi, who got job as a taxi driver, comes wired differently than before. he says to others that he met with bhudhan'sson and beaten him and also that all are his including his phone. they receives a call from bhudhan thinking that it is his son itself and says a load is coming on his way. from here lalu and his friends starts tofight against bhudhan. he however returns as a smuggler in his own right and starts overshadowing vishnubuddhan. angered by this, vishnubuddhan kills kurudi and lalu avenges his friend's death by killing vishnubuddhan and taking over his business. his friend sachi comes to meet him and says lalu to meet the new commissioner of policed. when lalu goes to meet, he comes to know that sachi, his friend is the commissioner of police sachin r.menon and he is eventually jailed.
back in the present, as lalu finishes his narration, he sees vishnubuddhan's son sitting in a car parked nearby. realising it to be a trap, lalu becomes alert but the man to whom lalu has just narrated his story shoots him. before leaving the man reveals that he was actually sent by vishnubuddhan's son to kill lalu. the final scene shows lalu lying badly wounded but his hand moves slightly, revealing that his chapter is not yet over.


== cast ==
dulquer salmaan as hari lal (lalu)
sunny wayne as kurudi (nelson mandela p. p.), lalu's friend
gauthami nair as geethu (geethanjali janardanan)
baburaj as chaver anthony/chaver vavachan(double role)
rohini as lalu's mother (devaki, sister of janardanan)
sudesh berry as vishnu budhan
kunjan as janardanan (lalu's uncle)
mithun nair as sidharth budhan, son of vishnu budhan
bibin perumbillikunnel as abu
anil anto as neerali
actor murali krishnan murali krishna as sethu
ratheesh as ummar
aneesh gopal as vikadan
baiju varghese as babu
sam as sunil
vijay kumar as sachin r. menon ips a.k.a. sachi
noora michael as surabhi
sundar as abhi
joby as kochu
sreekumar kozhikode as s.i. george
robin wilson as kuttu
jayaraj kozhikode as ramettan
kottayam bose as moopan
dominin as interview
bibin as sajan george
sidhu r. pillai as shyam


== production ==
dulquer salman made his debut in films through second show. salman starred alongside debutantes  gauthami nair, sudesh berry and debutant director sreenath rajendran.  debutant vini vishwa lal has penned the screenplay and dialogue.  pappu was cinematographer and sakhi thomas was the costume designer. aopl international pvt ltd produced the film.  kaithapram has handled the music. avial band is also contributing with a musical number. baburaj is also appearing in supporting roles. the project designed by shaz shabeer strikers & crew.


== music ==
all music is composed by avial and nikhil rajan.


== critical response ==
nowrunning.com rated the movie 2.5 out of 5 and said "srinath rajendran's film does have a head-spinning quality to it that leaves you dazed at times, but remains entertaining and witty to the hilt". indiaglitz.com rated the movie 6.5 out of 10 by saying "overall, 'second show ' though with its share of little negatives, is an honest effort that deserves to be encouraged".rediff.com gave the movie 2 out of 5 stars and said the movie was disappointing.  sify.com in its review said that "ultimately, it's an above average film, at best time-pass viewing. watch it with no expectations and if youre ready to think unconventional, this film could be a nice option."


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
second show at imdb