seema tapakai is a 2011 indian telugu-language comedy film written and directed by g.nageswara reddy, produced by dr. vijaya prasad malla under wellfare creations banner and starring allari naresh and poorna in lead roles. the film soundtrack was composed by vandemataram srinivas and cinematography was handled by adusumilli vijay kumar. the dialogue of the movie was written by popular writer marudhuri raja. the screenplay was handled also by g nageswara reddy. this film marks the debut of actress poorna in telugu cinema. seema tapakai was released on 13 may 2011.


== plot ==
sri krishna (allari naresh) is the son of a big businessman and multimillionaire, gk (sayaji shinde). his father is so rich that he hates even the smell of the poor, and despises anyone who talks about giving money as alms. sri krishna's family, too, doesn't mind the opulence they have. coming from this family, he falls in love with satya (poorna), who thinks the rich become richer by exploiting the poor. in order to make satya fall for him, krishna starts acting as a poor chap, with a poor family. he buys his way out to show satya that he helps the poor, and unintentionally becomes their savior of sorts. when satya accepts his love, he recruits his family to help him convince her completely. so the rich father becomes a banana seller, rich mother becomes a bajji seller, etc. however, it turns out that satya is the daughter of nagineedu (nagineedu) a factionist from kurnool who has a rivalry with another faction leader venkatappa(jaya prakash reddy). she urges her father to share his riches with his followers, an idea which his father doesn't take. but on knowing that she wants to marry a poor boy, he doesn't mind it. in order to get them married krishna asks her father to act as a head master. both families in their disguises respectively meet and arrange the marriage of krishna and satya. faction leader venkatappa attacks the family of gk to kill nagineedu. knowing the truth about nagineedu, gk is angered and cancels the marriage. krishna uses his brain to try to help resolve issues between venkatappa and nagineedu and also convinces his father gk for the marriage. in the end, the two factionists understand the value of life and they stop fighting. both gk and nagineedu once again agree upon krishna's marriage.


== cast ==


== production ==
this movie was produced by dr. vijaya prasad malla, who is also an mla in andhra pradesh legislative assembly. the director of this movie g nageswara reddy had previously worked with allari naresh in the movie seema sastri as director. he collaborated for the second time with allari naresh for this movie. both naresh and nageswara reddy are known for their comedy in movies. as expected this movie was a comedy entertainer. the movie was delayed due to the telugu movie strike of 2011. this was allari naresh's second release in the year after aha na pellanta. poorna who acted in several tamil and malayalam movies in the past was cast for the role of satya, daughter of a factionist. this is poorna's first telugu movie. being a comedy movie, it features most of the telugu comedians like l.b. sriram,  brahmanandam, m. s. narayana, sayaji shinde, rao ramesh, jaya prakash reddy, jeeva, uttej, vennela kishore and geeta singh. famous dialogue writer marudhuri raja assisted nageswara reddy with the dialogues in the movie. shooting of the movie began in 2010 and was completed in april 2011 and the movie was released in may 2011. shooting was predominantly done in hyderabad.


== release and reception ==
the movie was released in india and overseas on 13 may 2011.  the movie was received with positive reviews. suresh kavirayani of times of india gave a good 3 of 5 rating for the movie and said the movie was fun to watch with whole family. esskay from 123 telugu gave a 3.5 of 5 rating for the movie and commented that the movie was the best entertainer of the season. sunita chowdary from cinegoer gave a very positive review of the movie and said that it was a fun film for all that summer. the movie fared very well at the box office and was declared a hit in the year 2011.


== soundtrack ==
audio release of the film was held on 18 april 2011 in hyderabad. the audio was released and distributed by madhura audio.  the music of this movie was composed by vandemataram srinivas. the audio was well received. bheems penned 2 songs in the movie while bhaskarabhatla ravikumar and chilakarekka ganesh penned one song each. the famous song "akasamlo oka tara" in the movie simhasanam, written by legendary poet veturi and music by bappi lahiri was remixed by vandemataram srinivas for this movie. the song was sung by javed ali and sravana bhargavi.


== remake ==
the film was remade into hindi as ajab gazabb love. directed by sanjay gadhvi, the film stars jackky bhagnani and nidhi subbaiah in lead roles.


== references ==


== external links ==
seema tapakai at imdb