seven days ashore is a 1944 american comedy film directed by john h. auer and written by edward verdier, irving phillips and lawrence kimble. the film stars wally brown, alan carney, marcy mcguire, virginia mayo, elaine shepard, gordon oliver, amelita ward and dooley wilson. the film was released on april 25, 1944, by rko pictures.


== plot ==
dan arland is a fun-loving playboy who has been away at sea in the merchant marine for several months. a pair of violinists in dot diamond's all-female bandcarol dean and lucy banninghave no idea that dan's been romancing both of them. both end up waiting for him when his ship arrives in san francisco for a seven-day leave. his actual girlfriendannabelle rogersfinds out about dan's being on shore leave, too.
dan begins coming up with schemes to get out of his dilemma. first, he uses a hat with three names for his selection process, drawing lucys name and throwing out carols. then he persuades a couple of shipmates, monty stephens and orval martin, to pose as millionaires and woo the two musicians. he pretends he is suffering from an old war wound and then asks monty to take lucy to the indigo club where her band is performing.  hes about to greet carol but then bumps into his parents and annabelle (annabelle is staying at his parents home and they hope that their son reconciles with her). he sends carol off to the club with orval. there are many other situations causing complications and all the ladies figure out what hes doing and so try to give him a taste of his own medicine, making him believe he's about to be served with a breach-of-contract lawsuit. the best way to avoid this is to get rid of carol and lucy and as such he tells orval and monty to pretend to be millionaires and romance the gold-digging violinists.  but what he doesnt know is that annabelle has joined forces with lucy and carol to teach him a lesson. after a series of mixups (including the fact that annabelle is engaged to alfred jones) dan and annabelle decide to get married before dan's seven days ashore are up.


== cast ==
wally brown as monty stephens
alan carney as orval 'handsome' martin
marcy mcguire as dot diamond
virginia mayo as carol dean
elaine shepard as annabelle rogers
gordon oliver as dan arland jr.
amelita ward as lucy banning
dooley wilson as jason
marjorie gateson as mrs. elizabeth arland
alan dinehart as daniel arland
miriam lavelle as hazel
margaret dumont as mrs. croxton-lynch
freddie slack and his orchestra as themselves
freddie fisher as himself
emory parnell as captain harvey


== references ==


== external links ==
seven days ashore at imdb