sharaabi (english: drunkard) is a 1984 indian hindi comedy drama film produced and directed by prakash mehra. this was mehra's sixth film in a row with amitabh bachchan.
sharaabi stars amitabh bachchan and jaya prada with pran and om prakash along with bharat bhushan and ranjeet. the music was composed by bappi lahiri.  it became a hit at the box office.the film, which was loosely inspired by the 1981 movie arthur, was remade in kannada in 1985 as nee thanda kanike with vishnuvardhan and jayasudha.


== plot ==
vicky kapoor (amitabh bachchan) is the only son of billionaire   industrialist ammarnath kapoor (pran) who is growing his business and has no time for his son. munshi phoolchand (om prakash) friend of amarnath is a care taker and in lieu of affection for vicky. being ignored by his dad regularly, vicky is inclined towards becoming alcoholic since his childhood days.
amarnath blames munshi for vicky becoming an alcoholic, but munshi confronts amarnath by saying that vicky's mom died bestowing vicky to him as amarnath did not even care to visit his dying wife, and his ignorance has made vicky an alcoholic. as munshi is about to leave his job, vicky swears him to stop. vicky being nice and polite, he sees an orphan kid anwar, whose mother died recently and kind of adopts him entrusting the school principal and munshi to take care of his schooling and bringing him up. now in adulthood. anwar becomes a police inspector and is still unaware of his secret angel who has helped him to grow into a successful man. vicky is now a famous alcoholic but very good at heart and helps random poor and ill children. he helps abdul (suresh oberoi), a butcher, and provides medical aid for his kid.
he meets meena (jaya prada), a dancer, a daughter of a poor blind man and falls in love with her. her agent natwar (ranjeet) is greedy in gaining vicky's money and harasses her and her blind father but doing petty theft of the gifts given by vicky to her. when amarnath tries to arrange vicky's marriage he disagrees and amarnath insults him by stating that poor girl won't marry him. vicky insults his father in front of all his business and political contacts.
vicky is framed for being with other girl by natwar, which makes amarnath angry and disowns vicky from his property and money, on which he agrees and munshi also tags along. natwar also kidnaps meena.
anwar realises that vicky was his secret angel and invites vicky and munshi to stay at his home to which vicky rejects at first but finally visits his home and sees meena who was rescued by anwar. vicky entrusts anwar that meena should stay at anwar's house till he is financially strong. they spend the night sleeping on the footpath. next morning when munshi leaves vicky to find work so that he can earn money and feed both of them. but he gets involved in an accident and dies. vicky quits alcohol and meets his father during a meeting and asks him to join him in last rights of munshi phoolchand, to which amarnath denies and angry vicky leaves by declaring him as an orphan as his rightful father munshi is dead and his biological father is not concerned in anything apart from work.
one of amarnath's business partners govardhandas (satyen kappu) always wanted his daughter to marry vicky but is always insulted by vicky in the past, so govardhandas meets natwar and pays him money to separate vicky and meena.
abdul, who was helped by vicky earlier, finds that his son is missing. natwar meets him and says that kidnappers have kidnapped his son and has demanded that abdul kills meena. abdul shows the kidnappers the dead body of meena and they return his son back to him.
vicky hears the death of meena and fights with natwar, where he blames that abdul was the one who has killed meena upon govardhandas' orders.
meanwhile, amarnath realizes his mistakes and starts missing vicky. desperate to see vicky, amarnath starts drinking and his business partner along with govardhandas takes advantage by taking amarnath's property under their name and planning to kill amarnath.
vicky comes to know about this and confronts govardhandas and his henchmen to a fight. vicky is shot by natwar on his arm but is rescued by anwar who then arrests natwar and govardhandas. vicky is helped by all his poor people whom he has helped in the past and nabs the remaining goons. abdul brings meena to injured vicky and amarnath, stating that vicky has helped his son in past so he would not kill vicky's love. amarnath accepts his mistakes and welcomes meena in his family.
in the end, vicky opens a housing complex for the poor and homeless and names it munshi phoolchand nagar.


== cast ==


== track listing ==
the music of this album is composed by bappi lahiri who won the filmfare award for best music director. all the songs of the album were hits. the song "jab chaar yaar" is inspired from runa laila's bengali song "bondhu teen din". kishore kumar won his 7th filmfare award for best male playback singer. kishore kumar was only singer nominated for that year for four songs from this album: "de de pyaar de", "inteha ho gayi", "log kehte hai", and won for the song "manzilein apni jagah hain" which is a record till date.


== awards and nominations ==


=== won ===
filmfare best music director award-bappi lahiri
filmfare best male playback award-kishore kumar for the song "manzilein apni jaga"


=== nominated ===
filmfare award for best film
filmfare award for best director - prakash mehra
filmfare award for best actor - amitabh bachchan
filmfare award for best actress - jaya prada
filmfare award for best male playback singer - kishore kumar for the song "de de pyaar de"
filmfare award for best male playback singer - kishore kumar for the song "inteha ho gayi"
filmfare award for best male playback singer - kishore kumar for the song "log kehte hai"
filmfare award for best lyricist - anjaan for the song "manzilein apni jaga"
filmfare nomination for best lyricist - anjaan and prakash mehra for the song "inteha ho gayi"


== references ==


== external links ==
sharaabi at imdb