sathamanam bhavati (transl. long live for 100 years) is a 2017 indian telugu language social drama film  written and directed by satish vegesna. the film, which deals with "tradition-technology conflict", "joint family vs nuclear family", and "midlife crisis" is produced by dil raju under sri venkateswara creations. the film features sharwanand, anupama parameswaran, prakash raj and jayasudha in key roles. an ensemble cast including naresh, indraja, raja ravindra, shiju, himaja, and sithara plays supporting roles.
the score and soundtrack are composed by mickey j. meyer, and cinematography is by sameer reddy. the film released worldwide on 14 january 2017 with highly positive reviews. the movie has similarities with bengali movie bela seshe. the screenplay of the film was archived at the oscar library. the film has received the best popular film providing wholesome entertainment-golden lotus award at the 64th national film awards "in appreciation of providing a feeling of jubilation by respecting family values in an unexplored manner". the film has garnered the state nandi awards for best direction, and best home viewing feature film.


== plot ==
raghavaraju (prakash raj), 69, is a farming landlord in atreyapuram village of andhra pradesh. he lives with his wife janakamma (jayasudha), 64, along with ragahvaraju's nephew bangararaju (naresh), 51, his wife, 48, and his son raju (sharwanand), 25. raghavaraju lives in this ancestral house built by his forefathers consisting of many generations living in the same household as a joint family. however, with changing times, ragahvaraju's two sons, ravi, 47, and kalyan "nani", 40, and daughter jhansi (indraja), 43, live in the united states, canada, and australia respectively as nuclear families. after a gap of 10 long years, all of his children arrive in the village during the holiday season of makara sankranti, under mysterious circumstances after they receive an email from raghavaraju, who expresses his wish to divorce his wife.
nithya (anupama parameswaran), 21, is the daughter of jhansi. soon nithya and raju fall in love but do not express it to each other. the siblings soon reunite. raju and nithya set up a meeting of their uncle with his old love interest. however, jhansi asks raju to reject nithya, which he does but which leaves her heartbroken.
raghavaraju and janakamma reveal that they are not going to divorce but getting separated from each other, while janakamma wants to live with her children. raghavaraju wants to see her wife happy, so he emails his children so that they can come home and take their mother with them. raju sent the divorce papers to a lawyer to make them understand the value of family. after raghavaraju's words, they felt sorry for avoiding their parents. jhansi accepts nithya and raju's marriage as they are in true love, and their marriage was accepted by the whole family. all of them celebrate sankranthi and promise to meet at ugadi in their village, while nithya stays with her grandparents and raju and his parents.


== cast ==


== trivia ==
a dubsmash episode from popular telugu films such as seetharamaiah gari manavaralu, seethamma vakitlo sirimalle chettu, brindavanam, athadu, mirchi, attarintiki daredi, and srimanthudu, becomes an integral part of the film's plot.


== production ==
in september 2015, sai dharam tej has signed two projects for dil raju under sri venkateswara creations, which were supreme directed by anil ravipudi and sathamanam bhavati by satish vegesna. in february 2016, sai dharam tej has opted out due to schedule conflicts and replaced by raj tarun opposite anupama parameswaran. later in may 2016, raj tarun was replaced by sharwanand as lead in the film.the principal photography of the film began in amalapuram, east godavari in early 2016 and was completed by november 2016.


== soundtrack ==
music composed by mickey j. meyer. the album was released by aditya music company.


== accolades ==


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
sathamanam bhavati at imdb