sherlock toms is a 2017 indian malayalam-language comedy film directed by shafi and written by sachy. the film stars biju menon, miya, srinda arhaan, salim kumar, and kalabhavan shajohn. it was produced by prem menon under his global united media. the plot follows the encounters of thomas, an indian revenue service employee, who is fondly sherlock toms due to his shrewd intelligence and keen observation skills. the film was released on 29 september 2017.


== plot ==
young thomas joy is an avid fan of sherlock holmes, a character created by arthur conan doyle. his friends call him 'sherlock toms' due to his keen observation skills. despite some childhood difficulties he grows up to be an irs officer but has a troubled relationship with his wife rekha, whom he married accidentally.
tom conducts an unfruitful raid on a "chit fund company" in which he caused damage to their vault and got suspended. tom attributes it to his wife's behaviour and has an argument with her. she calls the police and alleges tom hit her. he then faces court cases brought by rekha and the chit fund company. when it becomes apparent his lawyer is not succeeding in proving his innocence, tom loudly threatens to commit suicide. the judge orders tom to undergo psychiatric treatment but during the commotion, he flees and accidentally enters the office of the chit company from where he demands the lifting of his suspension and a divorce from rekha. he and rekha argue while he is still about to commit suicide and exposes his toxic relationship and abuse he suffered from her in front of hundreds and tv. he also asks for a rock band to play music while he stood there and demanded a reporter speak to him. 
in the office, he discovers cancelled currencies which he shows to the gathered media reporting about him. when the police rescue team captured him, tom confesses his suicide threat was an distraction to get the company raided thereby clearing his name.


== cast ==
biju menon as p.l.thomas irs alias sherlock toms deputy commissioner of income tax/ deputy director of enforcement directorate
salim kumar as choulo ashan
miya as shiney mattummel, tv reporter
srinda ashab as rekha toms aka sabdarekha, toms's wife
vijayakumar as sathyaprathapan i.p.s, commissioner
hareesh perumanna as fakrudeen aka fakru, constable
kottayam nazeer as s.i shinto
suresh krishna as pradeep, kerala fire and rescue services officer
noby marcose as madan thulasi
rafi as lazar, tom's father
dinesh prabhakar as costable gangu
sadiq as adv.sambashivan p. k
kalabhavan shajon as sugunan master
molly kannamaly as kuruvi thathi
sunil babu as uvvachu choulo, son of chouro ashaan
saju kodiyan as fa. kunnummel
jayan cherthala as p .sundaram, joint director of enforcement
balaji sharma as vinod, enforcement officer
kalyani nair a sherly, enforcement officer
vijayaraghavan as unneesho mappila
anu joseph as deepa, pradeep's wife
sarayu as magistrate
abu salim as markose
prasanth alexander as joby tharakan, branch manager at mannanam chits and finance, ravipuram branch
sohanlal
kalabhavan haneef as jolly
vinod kedamangalam as school peon
nelson as panthayam panchi
majeed	as prosecutor
rajesh paravoor as nilavudeen
vijayan karanthoor as sub inspector at alangad station
dhananjay as young toms
manju satheesh as p. bhanumathy, school h. m
manve surendran as sushma teacher
sreenivasan as narrator


== references ==


== external links ==
sherlock toms at imdb