shining victory  is a 1941 american drama film based on the 1940 play, jupiter laughs, by a. j. cronin.  it stars james stephenson, geraldine fitzgerald, donald crisp, and barbara o'neil, and it was the first film directed by irving rapper. bette davis makes a brief cameo appearance as a nurse in the film.


== plot summary ==
a brilliant research psychiatrist, dr. paul venner is driven out of budapest by another researcher who has taken false credit for venner's work. after going to london, dr. venner is offered a job in a scottish sanitarium where he can continue his research on dementia praecox, a disease from which his father had suffered.
mary murray, a young, pretty doctor, becomes his laboratory assistant. they fall in love, though she has plans to go to china to engage in medical missionary work in a year's time.  paul convinces her to remain with him, and the two become betrothed. a fire breaks out in the lab and mary tragically dies in an effort to salvage paul's valuable records. the deeply distressed doctor turns down several posts at prestigious universities in order to realize mary's dream of helping the sick in china.
the working title of the film was winged victory, but this was changed after it was learned that moss hart was writing a play with that title. hart's winged victory was filmed in 1944.


== cast ==
james stephenson as dr. paul venner
geraldine fitzgerald as dr. mary murray
donald crisp as dr. drewett
barbara o'neil as miss leeming
montagu love as dr. blake
sig ruman as professor herman von reiter
george huntley, jr. as dr. thornton
richard ainley as dr. hale
bruce lester as dr. bentley
leonard mudie as mr. foster
doris lloyd as mrs. foster
frank reicher as dr. esterhazy
hermine sterler as miss hoffman
billy bevan as chivers
clare verdera as miss dennis
crauford kent as dr. corliss
alec craig as jeweller
louise brien as nurse
bette davis as nurse
barlowe borland as patient (uncredited)


== see also ==
list of american films of 1941


== external links ==
shining victory at turner classic movies (trailer)
tcm article
shining victory at imdb