fucking ml (released in some countries as show me love) is a 1998 swedish romantic comedy-drama film written and directed by lukas moodysson in his feature-length directorial debut. it stars rebecka liljeberg and alexandra dahlstrm as two seemingly disparate teenage girls who begin a tentative romantic relationship. the film was released theatrically in sweden on 23 october 1998, and first premiered internationally at the 1998 cannes film festival.
the film received an overwhelmingly positive reception and won four guldbagge awards (sweden's official film awards) at the 1999 ceremony. its international awards include the teddy award at the 1999 berlin international film festival, and the special jury prize at the 34th karlovy vary international film festival.
the swedish title refers to the small town of ml in vstra gtaland county, western sweden. however, only a few scenes were filmed in ml, and they were not included in the final version. the main shooting took place in the nearby town of trollhttan, the location of producing company film i vst's studios.


== plot ==
two girls, agnes and elin, attend school in the small town of ml, sweden. elin is outgoing and popular but finds her life unsatisfying and dull. agnes, by contrast, has no real friends and is constantly depressed. agnes is in love with elin but cannot find any way to express it.
agnes's parents worry about their daughter's reclusive life and try to be reassuring. her mother decides, against agnes's will, to throw a 16th birthday party for her. agnes is afraid no one will come. viktoria, a girl in a wheelchair, shows up and agnes shouts at her in front of her parents, telling her they are friends only because no one else will talk to them. agnes, overcome with anger and depression, goes to her room and cries into her pillow shouting that she wishes she were dead, while her father tries to soothe her. viktoria leaves and agnes's family eats the food made for the party.
elin arrives at agnes's house, mainly as an excuse to avoid going to another party, where there will be a boy (johan, played by mathias rust) she wants to avoid. elin's older sister, jessica, who comes with her, dares her to kiss agnes, who is rumoured to be a lesbian. elin fulfills the dare and then runs out with jessica, only to soon feel guilty for having humiliated agnes.
after becoming drunk at the other party, elin gets sick and throws up. johan tries to help her and ends up professing his love to her. elin leaves johan and the party, only to return to agnes's house to apologize for how she acted earlier. in doing so, elin stops agnes from cutting herself. she even manages to persuade agnes to return with her to the other party. on the way, elin shares her real feelings about being trapped in ml. she asks agnes about being a lesbian and believes that their problems could be solved by leaving ml and going to stockholm. on impulse, elin persuades agnes to hitchhike to stockholm, which is a five-hour journey by car. they find a driver who agrees to take them, believing them to be sisters who are visiting their grandmother. while sitting in the back seat, they have their first real kiss. the driver sees them and, shocked at the behaviour of the two 'sisters', orders them to leave the car.
elin discovers that she is attracted to agnes but is afraid to admit it. she proceeds to ignore agnes and refuses to talk to her. elin's sister jessica sees that she is in love and pushes her to figure out who it is. to cover the fact that she is in love with agnes, elin lies, pretending to be in love with johan, and loses her virginity during a short-lived relationship with him. elin eventually admits her feelings, when, after a climactic scene in a school bathroom, they are forced to 'out' their relationship to the school.
the film ends with elin and agnes sitting in elin's bedroom drinking chocolate milk. elin explains that she often adds too much chocolate until her milk is nearly black. she must fill another glass with milk and mix it and that her sister jessica often gets mad that she finishes the chocolate. elin has the last word saying "it makes a lot of chocolate milk. but that doesn't matter."


== cast ==
alexandra dahlstrm as elin olsson
rebecka liljeberg as agnes ahlberg
erica carlson as jessica olsson
mathias rust as johan hulth
stefan hrberg as markus
josefine nyberg as viktoria
ralph carlsson as agnes's father, olof
maria hedborg as agnes's mother, karin
axel widegren as agnes's little brother, oskar
jill ung as elin's and jessica's mother, birgitta


== title ==
the original title of the film, fucking ml, refers to the girls' feelings about their small town: in a key scene elin shouts in desperation "varfr mste vi bo i fucking jvla kuk-ml?" (which roughly translates to "why do we have to live in fucking bloody cock-ml?").according to moodysson, the problem with the original title started when the film was sweden's candidate for the academy awards, though eventually it was not chosen as a nominee. the hollywood industry magazine variety refused to run an advertisement for fucking ml. thus, american distributor strand releasing asked for a new title. moodysson took the new title from the song at the end of the film, by robyn. distributors in other native english-speaking countries then followed suit. 

german: raus aus ml, lit.'out of ml [i.e. leaving the town]'
spanish: descubriendo el amor ("discovering love")
portuguese: amigas de colgio ("school friends")
czech: lska je lska ("love is love") the czech title is based on a lucie bl song of the same name, which references homosexuality.
russian:    (pokazhi mne lyobov, "show me love")
israel: f- ml
english: show me love


== reception ==


=== political controversy ===
even before the film was completed, it created controversy in the town of ml. local politicians campaigned to get the title changed because they argued that it would show the town in an unfair way and even undermine it as an economic centre. further pressure was brought on the makers of the film, the film i vst studio, who are partly financed by swedish local authorities, including ml.
however, the local complaints had no effect on the content or release of the film. since the release, the town of ml has tried to embrace the publicity generated, despite the fact that the town's name is missing from the english title. in the early 2000s the town founded the pop music "fucking ml festival."


=== critical and commercial response ===
fucking ml received the highest audience figures for a swedish film in 19989, with a total audience of 867,576 and a total audience for the whole of europe of 2,100,000. some reports outside sweden stated that in sweden the film had outgrossed the hollywood film titanic. in fact, titanic had over twice as many viewers as show me love in sweden in 1998. based on 39 reviews collected by the film review aggregator rotten tomatoes, 90% of critics gave show me love a positive review. it is among the top ten of the british film institute list of the 50 films you should see by the age of 14.the film received consistently good reviews, including the realism and credibility of its portrayal of what it is like to be a teenager in a small town in the 1990s. in addition, the efforts of the young actors were praised. jan-olov andersson at aftonbladet felt that dahlstrm's and liljeberg's imaginative appearance and interaction was "sensationally credible", and bo ludvigsson at svenska dagbladet wrote that it was "a warm, strong and confident film about the courage to be human". ludvigsson also believed that fucking ml, with its storytelling drive, leave and authenticity, was well above most of the swedish films of recent years. anders hansson at gteborgs-posten thought that director moodysson with fairly ordinary elements created "a film with unusual rise".autostraddle placed it at number one on its "top 10 best lesbian movies" list.


=== cultural impact ===
according to russian singer lena katina, producer ivan shapovalov was inspired to create the pop duo t.a.t.u. after the release of this film. the track "show me love" is featured in their album 200 km/h in the wrong lane.


== soundtrack ==
the film's soundtrack was released through metronome records and consists of songs in english and swedish language. swedish band broder daniel, who contributed three english language songs to fucking ml, saw a spike in popularity after the film's release. the band also released an ep titled fucking ml.

fucking ml / musiken frn filmen
label: metronome records
format: cd, compilation
country: sweden
released: 1998


== awards and nominations ==


== see also ==

list of submissions to the 71st academy awards for best foreign language film
list of swedish submissions for the academy award for best foreign language film


== references ==


== external links ==
show me love at imdb
show me love at the swedish film institute database 
show me love at allmovie