silsila (english: series of events) is a 1981 indian romantic drama film directed and produced by yash chopra. it stars amitabh bachchan, jaya bachchan and rekha, with sanjeev kumar, shashi kapoor and kulbhushan kharbanda in supporting roles. on his last birthday, yash chopra revealed that he had originally signed smita patil and parveen babi opposite bachchan, but after consulting with him, he cast jaya bachchan and rekha in their respective roles. padmini kolhapure revealed in an interview that she had also been considered for the role of chandni, but amitabh had considered her too young to star opposite him, she was only fifteen then.
this was the last film to feature rekha with amitabh bachchan. this was also the last film to feature amitabh bachchan with jaya bachchan until they appeared together on screen 20 years later in karan johar's kabhi khushi kabhie gham... (2001). after this film, jaya bachchan did not feature in any new releases until hazaar chaurasi ki maa (1998), 18 years later.
the film was a commercial failure at the box office. however, over the years, the film has acquired a cult following, and is widely acclaimed to be a classic film. to this day, the film is  considered to be one of chopra's best works. he also said that this film and lamhe were his favourites. the movie's soundtrack became a "super-hit" upon the release of the film and continues to be popular.


== plot ==
orphaned at a young age, brothers shekhar and amit malhotra live independently. shekhar is the squadron leader of the indian air force, while amit is a playwright in delhi. they have fallen for shobha and chandni, respectively, and is about to get married on the same day. however, shekhar was killed in the indo-pakistani war of 1971, leaving the pregnant shobha alone. therefore, amit forcefully married her and broke up with chandni. the broken-heart chandni later married to the physician dr. anand.
tragedy strikes once more and shobha loses her child in a car accident. with no child to bind them together, amit and shobha drift apart. he runs into chandni and they secretly rekindle their romantic relationship. they meet on the sly until a night when chandni accidentally hits a passerby on the way home from a tryst with amit. the police get involved, but amit manages to hush the matter up. but, the affair is endangered because the police inspector who investigates the accident is shobha's cousin, who is determined to expose them.
soon, amit decides that he can no longer continue his loveless marriage to shobha and wishes to reconcile with chandni. the news shatters shobha, but she believed that her love will make him return to her. anand is also aware of chandni's infidelity and feel devastated; when he leaves on a business trip, amit and chandni secretly leave the town to start a new life. anand's plane, however, crashed and causes the three to rush to the wreckage site. rushing into the fray to save anand, amit is confronted by shobha, who reveals that she is expecting his child. after anand is rescued, chandni realises her love for her husband and decides to live together with him. the film ends with a song depicting amit and shobha living happily in their marriage.


== cast ==
amitabh bachchan as amit malhotra
jaya bachchan as shobha malhotra
rekha as chandni
sanjeev kumar as dr. v. k. anand
shashi kapoor as sqdr. leader shekhar malhotra (special appearance)
kulbhushan kharbanda as inspector kulbhushan
sushma seth as actress


== production ==


=== filming ===
silsila was one of the hindi films to be shot at the srinagar airport. the song "dekha ek khwaab" was shot in the keukenhof tulip gardens in the netherlands and some parts in pahalgam.


== music ==
the music for the film was composed by shiv-hari, and the lyrics were written by javed akhtar, hasan kamal, and rajendra krishan. the song "rang barse bhige chunar wali" is said to be one of india's best known folk songs. its lyrics were by poet harivansh rai bachchan. according to music expert rajesh subramanian, the tune of "neela aasman so gaya" was actually composed by shammi kapoor. kapoor made bachchan hear it on the sets of zameer. bachchan suggested it to yash chopra, who incorporated it in silsila. the lyrics of "tum hoti to kaisa hota" were taken from the poetry collection "banjara" by javed akhtar.


== box office ==

silsila did not do well at the box office, grossing  70 million (us$8.05 million), but has since achieved a cult status among indian audiences. it launched shiv hari as a commercially successful duo, and its songs continue to be remembered and heard in india.


== awards and nominations ==
29th filmfare awards
nominations

best actor - amitabh bachchan
best actress - jaya bachchan
best music - shiv-hari


== references ==


== external links ==
silsila at imdb
silsila at bollywood hungama