silver dream racer is a 1980 motor-racing film starring british pop star david essex and beau bridges. the film was produced, written and directed by david wickes. it was the last film to be made by the rank organisation.


== plot ==
nick freeman (david essex) is an aspiring motorcycle racer, whose brother has been developing an experimental motorcycle. when his brother dies before being able to test and race the new bike, nick inherits the responsibility to prove his brother's design. in spite of a series of tough setbacks, including the loss of his girlfriend, nick goes into the big race at the british grand prix with all his energy and concentration bent on winning. however, an underhanded american racer (beau bridges) is also among the competitors, and is determined to ruin nick's chances. numerous incidents happen before nick crosses the finish line in first place. two completely different endings were filmed depicting nick after he has won the race, and both versions were released.


== cast ==
david essex as nick freeman
beau bridges as bruce mcbride
cristina raines as julie prince
clarke peters as cider jones
harry h. corbett as wiggins
diane keen as tina freeman
lee montague as jack freeman
sheila white as carol
patrick ryecart as benson
ed bishop as al peterson
t. p. mckenna as bank manager
david baxt as ben mendoza
barrie rutter as privateer
steve henshaw as privateer
doyle richmond as cider's brother
nick brimble as jack davis
malya woolf as mrs. buonaguidi
stephen hoye as clarke nichols
richard leparmentier as journalist
murray kash as 1st tv reporter
bruce boa as 2nd tv reporter
christopher driscoll as photographer
leslie schofield as reporter
robert russell as garage mechanic
morris perry as financier
elisabeth sladen as bank secretary (as elizabeth sladen)
jim mcmanus as bike salesman
antony brown as executive
edward kalinski as disco boy
joanna andrews as disco girl
vincent wong as 1st japanese man
cecil cheng as 2nd japanese man
david neville as man at bank
godfrey jackman as bank doorman
june chadwick as secretary
kate harper as 1st party guest
derrie powell as 2nd party guest
perry cree as 3rd party guesttuesday weld had talks about playing the female lead. she eventually took another role, and cristina raines took the part.some scenes were filmed during the 1979 grand prix at silverstone, northamptonshire. the silver dream racer was a real motorcycle, designed by barry hart of the barton company. english motorcycle racer roger marshall did most of david essex's riding for the film.


== reception ==
the guardian said "the story is as boring as hell". the los angeles times called it a "lively genre piece".the film was not a commercial success at the box office. it holds a 33% fresh rating on review aggregate site rotten tomatoes.


== references ==


== external links ==
silver dream racer at imdb
silver dream racer at rotten tomatoes