simhasanam (transl.throne) is a 1986 indian telugu-language epic film written, directed, edited, and produced by krishna, who starred alongside jaya prada, radha, and mandakini. the film was simultaneously made in hindi as singhasan. based on a folklore tale, the film released on 21 march 1986. simhasanam is the first 70 mm stereophonic sound film in telugu cinema.


== plot ==
the kingdom of dasarna has a brave and able army chief by the name of vikrama simha. princess alakananda devi is in love with him. the chief minister contrives to dethrone the king and procure the throne for his son. but as long as vikrama singha is present, his plans cannot bear fruit. so he traps vikrama singha by getting false witnesses to testify that he has tried to kill the princess. vikrama simha is exiled. meanwhile, the neighbouring kingdom of avanti has the crown prince aditya vardhana, who looks exactly like vikrama singha, who is very jovial and tries to spend his time with jaswanthi, a dancer who dances in the kingdom. the queen of avanti is not happy with this behaviour of aditya vardhana and she tries to change his behaviour and she succeeds in that. she always wanted aditya vardhana to marry alakananda devi. but when aditya vardhana went hunting in the forest, he finds chandana or vishakanya and falls in love with her. chandana also loves him. later after some incidents, chandana learns that she is a vishakanya. she tries to commit suicide but later is saved by vikrama simha. he changes chandana. aditya vardhana convinces vikrama simha to rule his kingdom till some problems in the kingdom are solved. vikrama simha accepts that and later returns the throne to aditya vardhana. the raja guru of avanti contrives to procure the throne for his son. aditya vardhana marries chandana. vikrama simha finally foils the chief minister's plans to acquire the throne of dasarna. vikrama simha marries alakananda devi.


== cast ==
krishna as vikrama simha and aditya vardhana
jayaprada as princess alakananda devi
kantha rao as maharajah of dasarna
radha as jaswanthi
kaikala satyanarayana as rajguru
mandakini as visha kanya
gummadi venkateswara rao minister of avanti
m. balayya as ex-minister of dasarna
prabhakar reddy as minister of dasarna
giri babu as ugra rahu
amjad khan as bhokkudu
pradeep chandran


== production ==
principal photography took place at padmalaya studios, hyderabad, along with hogenakkal and mysore. the film was shot in 60 days.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the film was composed by bappi lahiri.
telugu"akasamlo oka tara"  raj sitaram, p. susheela
"gumma gumma"  raj sitaram, p. suseela
"idhi kalayani nenanukona"  raj sitaram, p. suseela
"swagatham"  raj sitaram, p. suseela
"vahavaee yavvanam"  raj sitaram, p. suseela
"vayyaramantha"  raj sitaram, p. suseela


== reception ==
this was the first film to collect more than 1.5 crore in its first week run. it surpassed the record of highest gross collection in a single theatre in the state in hyderabad.


== references ==


== external links ==
simhasanam at imdb