singapore is a 1960 thriller film, starring shammi kapoor, padmini, shashikala, agha, k. n. singh, madan puri, helen and maria menado. the film was directed by shakti samanta. an indo-malaya co-production, this was one of the first full length bollywood feature films to be shot extensively in locations outside india.


== plot ==
shyam (shammi kapoor) has deputed his manager ramesh to sell off his rubber estate in singapore. while going through the old records, ramesh finds a map revealing that there is a huge treasure on the rubber estate. he immediately writes to shyam. but to ramesh's surprise, neither does shyam reply to his letters, nor does he come to singapore.
ultimately, shyam is contacted on the phone. but the line is cut during the conversation. failing to understand anything, shyam flies to singapore. once in singapore, shyam comes to know that ramesh has been missing since their conversation on the phone was abruptly cut off. shyam desperately starts searching for ramesh. he informs the police and taps every source which could lead him to ramesh. in his search, he meets lata (padmini), an indian dancer and comes to know that lata's sister shobha (shashikala) is infatuated with ramesh. he starts visiting lata's place frequently, where he meets shivdas (k. n. singh), uncle of lata.
one day, lata, shobha, shivdas and shyam go to the rubber estate for a picnic. at the very first opportunity, shivdas steals the map leading to the treasure from shyam's bag. shobha sees this and follows shivdas into the estate. shyam follows too, but just to realise that shivdas is shot by hoodlums and then the body goes missing. just when he recovers from the shock, the hoodlums start to attack him.
once he escapes from them and is headed to inform lata that her uncle is dead, the police arrive to arrest shyam with circumstantial evidence of murdering shivdas. with chachoo (agha), he proves that he is not guilty, and brings down the whole gang led by chang (madan puri).


== cast ==
shammi kapoor as shyam
padmini as lata
maria menado as maria
shashikala as shobha
k. n. singh as shivdas
madan puri as chang
agha as cha choo
helen as malaysian village dancer
rajan kapoor as ramesh
lillian as chin choo choo
gautam mukherjee
ratan gaurang as tholong chi the worker at rubber estate
harbans darshan m arora as police inspector from police headquarters


== soundtrack ==
the film's music was composed by the composer duo shankar-jaikishan.
the famous lines jeevan mein ek baar aana singapore are from the song "dekho ji dekho."


== references ==


== external links ==
singapore at imdb