is love enough? - sir is a 2018 indian hindi-language romantic drama film directed by rohena gera. the movie stars tillotama shome and vivek gomber and was produced by rohena gera and brice poisson. sir had an initial release at the cannes film festival followed by theatrical release in european countries in 2018. the film was theatrically released in india on 13 november 2020.


== plot ==
ratna is an on premise maid employed by ashwin and his girlfriend, sabina.
ashwin has recently returned to mumbai from new york leaving behind his dream to be a writer after learning his brother is not well. he stays back to support his family emotionally when his brother dies.
ratna is an independent person with self-respect. she is working in mumbai to be self-sufficient and also financially helps her family and encourages her sister to study. it was her dream to study which she could not fulfill because of marriage and wants her sister to get educated. she also nurtures a dream to become a fashion designer.
the movie opens with ratna being called back for work as ashwin has left his to-be wife, sabina at the altar and has come back home. from the conversations with his friends and family we learn that sabina had cheated on him and he wasn't really in love with her. he stays low spirited for days until ratna, not able to see him unhappy narrates her story of losing her husband after just 4 months when she was 19 years old but now she is an independent woman who is supporting her family. she says "life never stops", implying we should move on with our life whatever may come. she stays back to work at his house defying the possibility of bad name of living with a man alone. we gradually learn that ashwin is a nice person who does not care about class differences and respects ratna like any other person in his life. he speaks up for her when an acquaintance of his scolds her for spilling a drink. 
over time ashwin learns about ratna's dream to become a fashion designer when ratna asks ashwin's permission to go to tailoring classes and expresses her wish to become a fashion designer. ashwin initially thinks light of her desire, but immediately corrects himself and asks ratna's apology and says 'everyone has the right to dream'. ratna also feels for ashwin as he is stuck in mumbai for his family not being able to follow his dream to write. they support each other emotionally.
ratna gifts him a shirt on ashwin's birthday which she designs herself. he wears the shirt on the same day. she also gets a sewing machine as gift from ashwin. they become affectionate of each other. meanwhile ratna learns that her sister is getting ready for marriage before completing her diploma. she is disappointed to know her sister is enthusiastic to come to mumbai than to complete her studies. but ashwin consoles her by saying that the groom might be a good person, who wants his wife to be independent. he gifts some money for her sister's wedding even when she resists. he calls her when she is away for the wedding to check in with her. the attention makes her uncomfortable, but she is happy too.
upon her return to work for ashwin, the dynamic changes between them. ashwin expresses his feelings. though ratna gets attracted to him for a moment while they share a kiss, she strongly expresses her will against any possible relationship. when ashwin asks her to go out, she takes him to the building rooftop where they share some thoughts and have a conversation. ashwin discourages her to call him 'sir'. ratna pleads him to forget about their kiss. when ashwin's friend learns of his feelings he discourages him from being in a relationship with a maid and reminds him of the social repercussions of such a relationship. he says for ratna's sake he should not act upon his feelings. ratna, as the maid, is asked to cook for a party at ashwin's mother's place. ashwin unintentionally makes ratna uncomfortable by asking if he should wait for her to go back home, provoking the scorn of other household employees. 
when they are back ratna makes it clear that they cannot be in a relationship and she will not be welcome among his family and friends and vice-versa. when he insists on being together, she decides to quit her job and leaves, despite ashwin's request to help her in anyway if not staying together. she tells him not to worry for her. ratna moves to her sister's house, while ashwin tells his father that despite his love for ratna, he will be moving back to new york. after some time, we see ratna getting hired by ashwin's friend who is a fashion designer, likely because of ashwin's recommendation. ratna eagerly goes to ashwin's house to see him but finds that the door is locked. she goes to the rooftop and gets a call from ashwin. finally, understanding ashwin's insistence of seeing her as an equal, she reconciles with her identity crisis and responds to his call by addressing him by his first name "ashwin". this also indicates that despite social differences, there can be love.


== cast ==
tillotama shome as ratna
vivek gomber as ashwin
divya seth as ashwin mother
dilnaz irani as nandita ashwin sister
anupriya goenka as ankita
rashi mal as sabina
bachan pachera as tailor mastar
geetanjali kulkarni as laxmi
ahmareen anjum as devika
rahul vohra as haresh
saharsh kumar shukla as sabina's driver


== reception ==
rahul desai of film companion wrote, "ashwin is the employer and ratna is his on premise housemaid. sir is about their unlikely bond  a meditation on the shackles of social structure, but also an indictment of the social anatomy of love."


== soundtrack ==
the film's music was composed by ragav vagav, were written by mohit chauhan.


== accolades ==


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
sir at imdb