smokescreen is a 1964 british crime drama film, written and directed by jim o'connolly and starring peter vaughan.


== plot ==
mr roper, an insurance investigator, travels to brighton to assess the apparent death of a businessman after his burning car was seen crashing over a cliff into the sea. the insurance company is suspicious, as the man had only recently taken out life insurance for a large sum. the car is recovered and no body is found. roper and the police have to find out whether they are dealing with an accident, an insurance fraud or a murder.


== cast ==
peter vaughan as roper
john carson as trevor bayliss
yvonne romain as janet dexter
gerald flood as graham turner
glynn edwards as inspector wright
john glyn-jones as player
sam kydd as hotel waiter
deryck guyler as station master
penny morrell as helen, turner's secretary
david gregory as the smudger
jill curzon as june
barbara hicks as miss breen
bert palmer as barman
tom gill as reception clerk
edward ogden as police sergeant
anthony dawes as john dexter
romo gorrara as taxi driver
maja hafernik as mrs dexter's maid
derek francis as dexter's doctor (uncredited)
damaris hayman as mrs roper's nurse (uncredited)


== critical reception ==
the radio times: "this above-average programme filler has a passable plot (involving a little bit of skulduggery in suburban brighton) that's kept moving swiftly and painlessly by director jim o'connolly...vaughan plays with a dogged determination that is efficient, engaging and quite at odds with the more sinister characterisations he would essay later in his career". bfi screenonline described the film as "an utterly charming b-film comedy-thriller that emphasises character as much as plot and makes full use of extensive location footage."the film historians steve chibnall and brian mcfarlane selected smokescreen as one of the 15 most meritorious british b films made between the second world war and 1970. they describe it as an "uncommonly neat little insurance racket-cum-murder thriller" and praise the way that its comic relief is "built into the fabric of the film's main narrative action".


== locations ==
the opening scenes were shot in london, but much of the rest of the film was shot on location in west sussex and east sussex, including the brighton area. the scene featuring derek guyler as the station master was shot at hellingly railway station, which has since been closed.


== references ==


== external links ==
smokescreen at imdb
"smokescreen (1964)". screenonline (film review). retrieved 15 march 2021. cs1 maint: discouraged parameter (link)