snowbound is a 1948 british thriller film directed by david macdonald and starring robert newton, dennis price, stanley holloway,  herbert lom, marcel dalio and guy middleton and introducing mila parly. the screenplay concerns a group of people searching for treasure hidden by the nazis in the alps following the second world war. it was based on the 1947 novel the lonely skier by hammond innes. the film's sets were designed by the art director maurice carter.


== plot ==
british film director derek engles recognises neil blair, an extra on his set. in order to investigate some intelligence which he had picked up in italy, engles offers blair a new job because he trusts him (he used to be blair's commanding officer). he wants blair to keep him posted on the activities of everyone who stays at a ski lodge, whilst posing as a scriptwriter. blair accepts this offer and travels to italy with a cameraman, joe wesson, to accompany him.
at a tavern, aldo, the innkeeper, tells blair there are no rooms available, however another guest, stefano valdini, helps them to find lodging. blair soon encounters the comtessa forelli and a greek named keramikos who also arrives.
when blair makes his first report, engles is particularly interested that the lodge is to be auctioned off the next day. the proprietor of a nearby hotel tells blair that the auction is rigged in his favour, but instead there is a heated bidding war, with a lawyer for an unknown party making an excessive winning bid.
keramikos tells blair that he knows he isn't really writing a script and also claims that mayne was a deserter from the british army who worked for him in greece. blair begins falling in love with the comtessa, who admits her real name is carla rometta. also, blair observes keramikos speaking german with another man.
the next day mayne invites blair to go skiing. when blair crashes and is knocked unconscious, mayne leaves him behind in the freezing snow and just reports that blair is missing. carla overhears and telephones mancini, who organises a search party and blair is rescued.
engles arrives at the lodge, just before a snowstorm that leaves all the parties stranded for the night. at dinner, engles confirms he was a colonel in british intelligence and identifies keramikos as von kellerman, a gestapo special agent based in venice. when italy was being over-run by the allies, kellerman was ordered to transport the gold reserves of the bank of italy to germany. he assigned the task to captain heinrich stelben, unaware stelben was involved with carla rometta. at carla's urging, stelben left the gold at the lodge and, after shooting his own men, reported he had been ambushed. one of the men is only wounded and kellerman learns of the gold's whereabouts, which he wants to finance the rebuilding of a new fascist germany.
when carla attacks mayne after learning that he had agreed to kill her and valdini, he knocks her unconscious. valdini throws a knife at him. mayne shoots him dead, but is knifed in the back by aldo on kellerman's order. kellerman produces a pistol, has carla locked up, and orders the englishmen to dig for the gold. mayne comes to and tries to free carla, but knocks over a lamp that sets the building on fire, then succumbs. when no gold is found, kellerman does not believe that engles does not know where it is and shoots him. in the ensuing fight, wesson drags the unconscious blair out of the basement. the burning hut collapses on the others. carla reveals that she knows where the gold is, but cradling blair, declares she will never reveal its location, as it has caused too many deaths.


== cast ==
robert newton as derek engles
dennis price as neil blair
stanley holloway as joe wesson
herbert lom as von kellerman, alias keramikos
marcel dalio as stefano valdini
mila parly as carla rometta
willy fueter as aldo, innkeeper
guy middleton as gilbert mayne
richard molinas as mancini, rental agent
catherina ferraz as emilia, innkeeper's wife
gilbert davis as commissionaire
massino coen as auctioneer
rositer shepherd as lawyer
lionel grose as corporal holtz
william price as stelben
zena marshall as italian girl


== production ==
hammond innes' novel the lonely skier was published in 1947. film rights were bought by sydney box at gainsborough studios. the film involved location shooting in the french alps. a unit was sent to shoot exteriors in the alps while directed david macdonald finished good time girl for gainsborough.studio filming at the lime grove studios in shepherd's bush took place in july 1947.


== reception ==


=== critical ===
the march 1948 variety review was not especially favourable, complaining that the "main failing of the yarn is that situations do not thrill sufficiently", and "for the romantic interest mila parely was imported from paris, an experiment difficult to justify by results."the los angeles times wrote that "the british flair for making gripping spine chillers explodes excitingly" in the film.


=== box office ===
by july 1953, the film earned a net revenue of 120,000.


== references ==


== external links ==
snowbound at imdb
snowbound at bfi