space master x-7 is a 1958 american black-and-white science fiction film in widescreen regalscope from regal pictures, produced by bernard glasser, directed by edward bernds, that stars bill williams, lyn thomas, and robert ellis. paul frees, judd holdren, and moe howard have supporting roles. the screenplay was written by george worthing yates and daniel mainwaring. 20th century fox distributed the film.
space master x-7 was theatrically released in july, 1958 as a double feature with the vincent price classic the fly.


== plot ==
a space probe returns to earth covered with a mysterious fungus, which, when accidentally mixed with human blood, transforms into an ever-growing pile of space rust. if not stopped, the infection could eventually cover the entire world.


== cast ==
bill williams as john hand
lyn thomas as laura greeling
robert ellis as pvt. joe rattigan
paul frees as dr. charles t. pommer
rhoda williams as stewardess archer
joan barry as jean meyers, a brunet
carol varga as elaine frohman
thomas browne henry as prof. west
thomas wilde as collins
fred sherman as mr. morse, hotel manager
gregg martell as jim dale, plane engineer
jess kirkpatrick as pilot vaccarino
court shepard as battalion fire chief hendry
moe howard as retlinger, the cab driver
al baffert as plane passenger


== production ==
after making several westerns for regal pictures, director ed bernds and producer bernard glasser thought they would make a science fiction picture.
bernds says the script was written on "spec" by daniel mainwaring and george worthing yates. bernard glasser bought it and director bernds rewrote the script without credit because the original was written for a feature film with a larger budget and a longer running time. bernds said the film's total budget was $ 90,000.glasser, however, recalled that space master x-7 was budgeted at $125,000, with $25,000 going to the screenwriters.
the film was rushed into production to take advantage of the explorer i satellite space launch. regal's head of publicity, marty weiser, recommended they change the title from missile into space to the more exciting-sounding space master x-7.
harry spalding, who was robert l. lippert's story editor, recalls the filmmakers went over budget but did a good job, so good they were hired for the return of the fly (1959).moe howard, who made a cameo appearance in the film in a notable departure from his slapstick performances, had worked previously with bernds on his three stooges shorts and asked if the production crew had a position for his son-in-law norman maurer. maurer would work as the film's production assistant received $1,000.00 for his efforts. in fact, glasser was so impressed with maurer's work that he recommended him to producer sidney pink for pink's upcoming science fiction film, the angry red planet (1959).


== video game trivia ==
a space master x-7 video game was announced in 1983 for the atari 2600 by fox's video game publishing arm; it was not based on the original feature film. in fact, programmer david lubar had not even heard of the 1958 film before fox decided to attach its title to an original game he had developed. the game's atari 800 port, published by sirius software that same year, was eventually released as alpha shield, dropping the film connection entirely.


== references ==


=== bibliography ===
warren, bill. keep watching the skies! american science fiction movies of the fifties (covers films released through 1962), 21st century edition. jefferson, north carolina: mcfarland & company, 2009 (first edition 1982). isbn 0-89950-032-3


== external links ==
space master x-7 at imdb 
space master x-7 at the tcm movie database 
space master x-7 at allmovie