spanish masala is a 2012 indian malayalam romantic comedy film directed by lal jose. the film stars dileep, kunchacko boban and biju menon. the film was released on 20 january 2012 to mixed-to-positive reviews, and recorded an average run at the box-offixe.


== plot ==
the story set in spain, and revolves around charlie (dileep), an illegal immigrant stranded in madrid. to make things worse, he is conversant only in malayalam. he gets a job as a cook in an indian restaurant, as he has some experience in running a roadside eatery in his homeland, run by an expatriate, majid. in the restaurant he is assigned with the task of serving up various types of dosa and, he comes up with a local variant named spanish masala. this turns out to be his passport to employment in the home of an ex-diplomat, who had earlier served in india.
there he meets the diplomat's daughter camilla (daniela zacherl), who is visually impaired. she becomes a big time fan of charlie's spanish masala. she is not on talking terms with her father (javier sandoval), who is believed to have killed her indian lover, rahul (kunchacko boban), the son of her malayali nanny, from whom she has learnt to speak malayalam. later camilla starts to get closer to charlie. since he can imitate impersonate voices, one servant pappan (nelson) leads him to imitate rahul's voice and keep rahul's memory alive.
after some days, she recovers and get gets her eye sight back, but now her dad is no more. a strange incident occurs when rahul arrives for his funeral. one day, as per menon's (biju menon) instruction, charlie cleans seor's (camilla's dad) room. he finds a cd which seor had seen before he died, and from that he finds out that rahul was sent to portugal to avoid the relationship between camilla and rahul, by paying him money by seor. again rahul is spared by charlie.
as it goes, one day menon enters a bar where he sees rahul and another girl dancing together. he went to interrogate about it by following him, when he saw rahul sitting with some goons and the girl. later he researched on it, when he came to know that it wasn't a good life for rahul in portugal. he sold the factory which seor offered him and he had taken loan from some goons for gambling and could not repay them. camilla heard about it and she felt sorrow that she was keeping a crooked lover in her mind. later camilla and menon go back to kerala, india to fix marriage between charlie and camilla.


== cast ==
dileep as charlie
kunchacko boban as rahul
biju menon as menon
daniela zacherl as camilla
javier sandoval as spanish ambassador philp de albey, camilla's father
chrys hobbs maria de albey
clemens berndorff as fernado
nelson sooranad as pappan
vinaya prasad as rahul's mother
kalaranjini as theresa; charlie's mother
sivaji guruvayoor as charlie's father
nandhu pothuval as troupe manager ravi
majeed as varghese maash
niyas backer as mimicry artist
nivin pauly as mathews (cameo)
archana kavi as lily; charlie's sister (cameo appearance)
franco simon as himself (cameo)


== shooting locations ==
the film was shot in madrid, the capital of spain. one song was shot in vienna, the capital of austria, and the remaining portions were shot in cochin and alappuzha districts of kerala. the film portrays several spanish arts, festivals and sports such as bullfighting, flamenco dance and la tomatina which was the real la tomatina festival shot for the first time in indian cinema. daniela zacherl, the female lead, is an austrian model. she replaced amy jackson who had to drop out due to conflicts with ekk deewana tha.


== soundtrack ==
the audio launch was done on 14 december at ima hall in kochi. song composer was vidyasagar, the lyrics are penned by r. venugopal. the soundtrack was rated 6/10 by music aloud.


== references ==


== external links ==
spanish masala at imdb