spellbinder is a 1988 american witchcraft-themed thriller film directed by janet greek, starring timothy daly and kelly preston. the screenplay was written by tracy torm. the original music score was written by basil poledouris. the film was marketed with the tagline "a nightmare of illusion and betrayal".


== plot ==
los angeles attorney jeff mills and his friend derek clayton rescue a beautiful woman, miranda reed, from an abusive boyfriend. the boyfriend makes satanic threats at jeff, but eventually leaves. as miranda has no home, jeff offers to let her stay at his. jeff becomes romantically involved with miranda, despite the ominous things that keep happening since he has met her.
miranda eventually reveals that she belongs to a coven run by her ex-boyfriend. she explains that the mysterious events jeff has witnessed are part of the coven's effort to bring miranda back into the fold. if they have not done so by the winter solstice, miranda will be free forever. the coven's solstice ritual features a human sacrifice on a beach. 
jeff vows to help miranda elude the coven. he hides her with one of his clients while he goes to work, but the coven finds miranda. jeff and derek rush to the beach to save miranda. the coven have her tied up as a sacrifice, but she is only there as bait. jeff is the real sacrifice, and derek is the actual leader of the coven. he kills jeff. the film ends with miranda and derek replaying the same scenario from the beginning of the film on a new victim.


== cast ==
timothy daly as jeff mills
kelly preston as miranda reed
rick rossovich as derek clayton
audra lindley as mrs. white
anthony crivello as aldys
cary-hiroyuki tagawa as lieutenant lee
diana bellamy as grace woods
james watkins as tim weatherly
kyle t. heffner as herbie green
m. c. gainey as brock
stefan gierasch as edgar de witt
roderick cook as ed kennerle


== release ==
the film was given a limited release theatrically in the united states by metro-goldwyn-mayer in september 1988.  it grossed $657,446 domestically at the box office.


== references ==


== external links ==
spellbinder at imdb
spellbinder at rotten tomatoes
spellbinder at allmovie