spellcaster is a 1992 american film directed by rafal zielinski and starring adam ant & bunty bailey.


== plot ==
orphaned siblings jackie and tom are elated to be chosen to participate in a treasure hunt alongside other players, for a prize of one million dollars. set in an italian castle owned by the mysterious diablo, all they must do to win the contest is be the first to find the check. also hunting for the money are several others that are highly competitive and willing to do anything to win. the contest is to be recorded for a mtv-esque music channel and sponsored by the recording company of pop star cassandra castle, who is to accompany the contestants throughout the hunt along with vj rex. cassandra, however, is unwilling to spend any time with the contestants and prefers to spend all of her time drinking excessively in her private room. upon a whim cassandra makes a deal with rex to hide the money on her person so none of the contestants can find it. upon the end of the competition the two will split the winnings. 
once the contest begins the contestants begin a frantic search for the check, unaware of cassandra's duplicity or that supernatural forces are picking the players off one by one.  cassandra's plans are waylaid when the forces begin to torment her and cause her to lose the check, which is carried throughout the castle on a magical breeze. eventually only jackie, cassandra, and tom are left, upon which point they are unable to ignore that something is very wrong. as jackie frantically searches for answers she discovers a room at the top of the castle containing a crystal ball and diablo, who reveals himself to be a demon. he also tells her that he has captured the souls of the other contestants in the sphere and will take them all to hell, as well as that his next victim will be her brother. meanwhile cassandra and tom have romantically connected with one another. he also discovers the check, which has landed near him and cassandra. tom is shocked when cassandra chooses to burn the check and warns him that the money comes with strings attached that he wouldn't want. she throws the check into a fireplace, only diablo to magically summon her to his room and chastise her for ruining his plans, revealing that cassandra had formed a contract with him and that he will be taking her soul to hell as well. in exchange for her soul she gained fame and wealth, which she quickly realized was not worth the bargain and took to alcohol and drugs to numb herself to her reality. in order to save both tom and cassandra jackie tries to bargain with diablo, offering her soul in exchange for the both of them. horrified, cassandra chooses to destroy diablo's crystal ball, which puts an end to his evil plans and brings all of the contestants back to life. this also frees cassandra, who reveals that she convinced diablo to give her back her soul and to instead vj at the music channel. the film closes with diablo hosting a music broadcast and announcing a new contest that will bring him all new victims.  


== cast ==
gail o'grady as jackie
bunty bailey as cassandra castle
harold pruett as tom
adam ant as diablo
richard blade as rex
kim johnston ulrich as teri
michael zorek as harlan
martha demson as myrna
dale wyatt as jamie
traci lind as yvette (as traci lin) (as traci linn)
william butler as billy
michael deak as andy
donald hodson as bruno
marcello modugno as tony
albert band as the cook


== production ==
the film began shooting during july 1986 near rome, italy. executive producer charles band allowed the filming to take place in a 12th century castle he had purchased for filmmaking, castello di giove. spellcaster's script was written by dennis paoli and ed naha, frequent collaborators with stuart gordon. the film was produced by band's empire pictures, which went defunct in 1988, and spellcaster's release was delayed until 1992, when it was released through columbia tristar home video.


== reception ==
review website cinema crazed rated the film favorably, stating that it was "about as goofy an eighties horror film as it gets" and that it "is essentially like a gory, exploitative version of willy wonka." variety called the film an "effective if cornball monster film".
mtv writer eric snider also reviewed the film, writing that it was "definitely a movie that has "mtv generation cult favorite" written all over it, next to "clearance sale" and "$1.99.""


== references ==


== external links ==
spellcaster at imdb
spellcaster at rotten tomatoes
spellcaster at allmovie