spring is here is a 1930 american pre-code musical comedy film produced by first national pictures and distributed by warner bros. it was adapted by james a. starr from the 1929 musical play, of the same name, by owen davis, with music by richard rodgers and lorenz hart. the film stars lawrence gray, alexander gray, and bernice claire.
an abridged version of the film was released in 1933 as the musical short yours sincerely.


== plot ==

bernice claire is in love with lawrence gray. claire's father, played by ford sterling, disapproves of lawrence but approves another suitor, played by alexander gray. alexander is shy and clumsy while lawrence is outgoing and romantic. when bernice returns one night at 5 a.m. with lawrence, her father orders him to stay away from his daughter. alexander, being discouraged at being rejected by bernice, is offered help by inez courtney, bernice's younger sister. alexander follows her advice and attempts to make bernice jealous to get her attention. he makes love to several women, including bernice's mother. the trick works and soon bernice thinks she is deeply in love with alexander. sterling gets into an argument with lawrence and tells him to leave his house for good. lawrence returns in the middle of the night to elope with bernice but alexander shows up and carries her off for himself. in the morning they are found together in bernice's room, to the shock of the family, and they eventually reveal to everyone that they have eloped.


== cast ==
lawrence gray as steve alden
bernice claire as betty braley
alexander gray as terry clayton
louise fazenda as emily braley
ford sterling as peter braley
inez courtney as mary jane braley
frank albertson as stacy adams
natalie moorhead as mrs. rita conway
brox sisters as singing trio


== songs ==
"spring is here (in person)" - performed by frank albertson and inez courtney
"yours sincerely" - performed by alexander gray and bernice claire
"with a song in my heart" - performed by lawrence gray and bernice claire
"bad baby" - performed by inez courtney
"cryin' for the carolines" - performed by the brox sisters
"have a little faith in me" - performed by alexander gray and bernice claire
"how shall i tell?" - performed by bernice claire
"what's the big idea?" - performed by frank albertson and inez courtney (vocal and dance)
"with a song in my heart" - reprised by alexander gray and bernice claire


== preservation status ==
the film survives intact and has been aired on broadcast and cable television.


== references ==


== external links ==
spring is here at imdb
yours sincerely at imdb
spring is here at the tcm movie database
spring is here at allmovie
spring is here at the american film institute catalog