sringaravelan is a 2013 malayalam comedy film directed by jose thomas and scripted by udayakrishna-siby k. thomas. it stars dileep and vedhika in her debut in malayalam cinema. the film released in onam, and was a commercial success at the box office.


== plot ==
kannan (dileep) is the son of a fashion weaver ayyapanashan (babu namboothiri). his father had sent him for fashion designing, but kannan wants to become rich overnight. his friends are yesudas a.k.a. yesu (lal),a goon and vasu (kalabhavan shajon).
kannan tries to woo rich girls and marry them and try to make his living. once kannan with vasu went to give saree to varmaji (nedumudi venu), who is ayyapanashan's friend and is a 'thampuran' of the 'kovilakam'. there kannan meets radhu (vedhika), varmaji's granddaughter and falls in love with her. kannan accidentally stops a pooja which was being held there and is forced to stay at that place for more than fortnight. in the process kannan gets more attracted to radhu and once he gets into her room when kannan was trying to escape that place. kannan expresses his love to her and radhu laughs, not taking it seriously.
d. gopi prasad a.k.a. dgp (joy mathew)('d' represence don as he was an underworld don in mumbai), is the father of radha and he is a big bombay don dada who wants to hide his daughter from several enemies who seek revenge (led by an unknown assassin later revealed to be the son of ahuja (sharat saxena)- dgp's former boss and his biggest enemy- wanting to avenge his father's and sister's deaths just days before her wedding). radhu and her grandparents don't like dgp as his profession is the cause for the death of radhu's mother, revathy (anju aravind). when kannan gets more attracted to radhu, she says that she loves him but due to her father and his high criminal background she will be unable to marry kannan and if her father knows about this love, kannan will be shot at sight. but radhu says that if kannan would be able to fight her father and marry her, she would be ready to go with him.
kannan gets scared hearing this. but he doesn't want to lose radhu. dgp orders kannan to leave the house  before the next morning.  at night, when kannan was sitting at the veranda of the outhouse, he notices someone trying to shoot radhu and at nick of time, on an intention to prevent it from happening, there ensues a fight with the assassin (the son of ahuja). learning that all have woken up, he escapes. dgp,who had ordered kannan to leave demands to not to go till the killer is found.


== cast ==
dileep as krishnan aka kannan
vedhika as radhu
lal as yesudas aka yesu
kalabhavan shajon as vasu
joy mathew as d. gopi prasad aka dgp
baburaj as mahalingam
nedumudi venu as radha's grandfather
babu namboothiri as ayyappanasaan, kannan's father
shammi thilakan as ookken tintu (reprising his role from neram)
ambika mohan as savithri, kannan's mother
geetha salaam
pala aravindan
ponnamma babu as aishwarya rani
saju kodiyan as narayanan nair
sreedevi unni
anju aravind as revathy
anjana appukuttan
rahul dev as vikram (ahuja's son)
sharat saxena as ahuja (dgp's old gang leader)


== soundtrack ==


== reception ==
metromatinee.com review: "dileep is typically exuberant and the heroine vedhika looks gorgeous and thankfully doesnt look out of place,".


== box office ==
the film is commercially hit. the film grossed 4.92 crore (us$690,000) from 5 days alone,


== references ==