st george's day is a 2012 british gangster film. it is directed by frank harper and stars harper, craig fairbrass, charles dance, vincent regan, dexter fletcher, nick moran and keeley hazell.


== plot ==
infamous cousins micky mannock (frank harper) and ray collishaw (craig fairbrass) run london's top firm. but their supremacy in the capital's gangster underworld is threatened when they lose a drug shipment belonging to the russian mafia. the stakes could not be higher as they plan an audacious heist in berlin. if successful, this could pay off their debts and set them up for life. hiding out among an english super-firm gearing up for a massive showdown as the 3 lions play germany on st. george's day, their gang have just one shot at the job. but with the cops and russians on their trail, the last thing they need is a grass (snitch) in the ranks.


== cast ==
craig fairbrass as ray collishaw
frank harper as micky mannock
charles dance as trenchard
vincent regan as albert ball
dexter fletcher as levi
nick moran as richard
keeley hazell as peckham princess
jamie foreman as nixon
sean pertwee as proctor
luke treadaway as william bishop
ashley walters as kootz
tony denham as eddie mannock
neil maskell as jimmy mccudden
zlatko buri as vladimir sukhov
clemency burton-hill as amelia
charles venn as lol
mark-john ford as louis
velibor topi as albanian thug
angela gots as ellie collishaw
susan fordham as undercover police
ludger pistor as werner voss
joe montana as jack
hetti bywater as lol's girlfriend
ronnie fox as klash
davinia taylor as sarah
peter vollebregt as jan van dorn
sura dohnke as hannah
faye tozer as police woman
faruk pruti as russian 1
robert cambrinus as anthony forker
hannah blamires as clubber
michael suluk as tiny
tommy mcdonnell as joe collishaw
craig henderson as dillan
sarah weatherstone as zoe
dominic burke as police forensic officer (as dom burke)
julie vollono as ferry passenger
scott bradley as german hooligan
timothy j. murphy as police officer
christian weathersone as ellie's son
elodie hill as ellie's daughter
russell balogh as dutch hooligan (uncredited)
james michael rankin as german thug (uncredited)
deborah rosan as lol's family  funeral scene (uncredited)
chris wilson as restaurant owner (uncredited)
tommy penfold as barman
dwain stephens as black waiter


== release and reception ==
the premiere of the film took place at the odeon in covent garden, london on 29 august 2012. the premiere was attended by stars of the film, such as frank harper, craig fairbrass, keeley hazell and tony denham, and other actors, such as bruce payne. the general release of the film took place on 7 september 2012. the film has received mixed reviews. the film has a rating of four out of five on time out's london magazine website while the daily telegraph gave it a rating of two out of five and the independent gave it a rating of one out of five. one reviewer stated that harper just about pulls off the 'globe-hopping plot involving gangsters, drug deals, heists and more than a touch of double-crossing betrayal' and that whilst the film is 'sometimes predictable, it's never dull, with a fast-paced plot and a terrific cast'. phelim o'neill, who reviewed the film for the guardian, stated that 'it's a low-budget film with enough ambition to take the action overseas, and it's nicely shot'.
joanna ebuwa, who reviewed the film for britflicks, stated that 'this is the best british gangster film since lock, stock & two smoking barrels, it's thoroughly entertaining, funny, nostalgic and pokes fun at the police and the establishment. harper has been studying from guy richie and is definitely one to watch'. john parrot, who reviewed the film for the film review stated that 'st george's day is so excessive, rude and genuinely cockney that it may become a cult movie'. in contrast, stephen kelly of total film stated that 'not even the formidable presence of charles dance can salvage a script this woeful'.


== references ==


== external links ==
st george's day at imdb
st george's day at rotten tomatoes