star 80 is a 1983 american biographical drama film written and directed by bob fosse, adapted from the pulitzer prize-winning village voice article "death of a playmate" by teresa carpenter and based on canadian playboy model dorothy stratten, who was murdered by her husband paul snider in 1980. the films title is taken from one of snider's vanity license plates.
the film stars mariel hemingway as stratten and eric roberts as snider, with supporting roles by cliff robertson, carroll baker, roger rees, stuart damon, josh mostel, and david clennon. the film chronicles stratten's relationship with snider, their move to los angeles and her success as a playboy model, and the eventual dissolution of their relationship and her murder.
star 80 was filmed on-location in vancouver, british columbia and los angeles, california; the death scene was filmed in the same house in which the murder-suicide took place. hugh hefner, disliking the way he was depicted in the film, sued the producers of the picture. in accordance with the family's wishes, dorothy's mother is never mentioned by name in the movie and the names of her sister and brother were altered. other names were also changed due to legal concerns. it is the second movie based on the murder of stratten, preceded by the 1981 television film death of a centerfold: the dorothy stratten story in which jamie lee curtis portrayed stratten and bruce weitz portrayed snider.
the film had a limited release in november 10, 1983, with a general release three months later in february of the following year. it was praised for hemingways and roberts's performances. roberts won the boston society of film critics award for best actor and was nominated for the golden globe award for best actor  motion picture drama, and fosse was nominated for the golden bear and the berlin film festival. it was fosse's final film as director before his death in 1987.


== plot ==
in 1980, dorothy stratten lies dead as her husband rants to himself about the events that led up to this. through a series of flashbacks which are interspersed by the murderer's rants, the story is told. two years earlier, stratten was working at a dairy queen in her hometown of vancouver, british columbia when she met paul snider, a brash small-time scam artist and pimp. snider charms stratten into letting him take her to her high school prom. he wins over stratten with attention and flattery, getting her to pose nude for polaroid photographs. there are red flags, however - he tries to run dorothy's life, threatens any other man who comes near her, and pays a borderline inappropriate amount of attention to her preteen sister.
snider uses the photographs to persuade a professional to create a portfolio of her. snider forges the signature of stratten's mother on a consent form and sends the portfolio to playboy. playboy invites stratten to los angeles to pose for a professional photographer.
playboy founder and publisher hugh hefner makes stratten playmate of the month for the august 1979 issue. hefner provides lodging for stratten and gives her a job as a bunny at an l.a. playboy club. snider pressures stratten into marrying him. she begins an acting career with small film and television roles and is made 1980's playmate of the year.
snider purchases a new mercedes sl with the vanity license plate star 80, but feels dejected after losing money on failed business ventures and being eclipsed by stratten's success. at the playboy mansion stratten catches the eye of movie director aram nicholas (modeled on peter bogdanovich), who lets her read for a film role. snider hires a private investigator to follow stratten and learns stratten and nicholas are sleeping together. snider buys a shotgun after stratten insists she is going to leave him. disregarding nicholas' plea for her to not see snider again, stratten agrees to meet with him to arrange a financial settlement. snider pleads with stratten not to leave him, but she says the marriage is over. enraged, he rapes and shoots her. as he then turns the gun on himself, the screen turns to black with the gunshot.


== cast ==


== reception ==
the film was screened out of competition at the 34th berlin international film festival. the washington post called it "bob fosse's latest stylish stinker." gene siskel of the chicago tribune placed the film on his top-10 list of the best films of 1983, while taking into account that the film was very unpleasant to watch. roger ebert, film critic for the chicago sun-times and siskel's cohost in the long-running tv series at the movies, gave the film four-out-of-four stars and deemed it an "important movie".appearing with siskel on an october 1986 edition of the late show starring joan rivers, ebert said roberts should have been nominated for an oscar for his work on star 80. ebert coined the phrase "star 80 syndrome" after acknowledging gary oldman's performance as sid vicious in sid and nancy was snubbed for the same reason as roberts: "hollywood will not nominate an actor for portraying a creep, no matter how good the performance is."the film opened in 16 theaters grossing $233,312 its opening weekend. eventually, the film grossed $6,472,990 domestically with 502 theaters being its widest release. star 80 has an 86% approval rating on rotten tomatoes based on 14 reviews, with an average score of 7.14/10.


=== accolades ===


== references ==


== external links ==
star 80 at imdb
star 80 at allmovie
star 80 at rotten tomatoes