stone of destiny is a 2008 scottish-canadian historical adventure/comedy film written and directed by charles martin smith and starring charlie cox, billy boyd, robert carlyle, and kate mara. based on real events, the film tells the story of the removal of the stone of scone from westminster abbey. the stone, supposedly the stone of jacob over which scottish monarchs were traditionally crowned at scone in perthshire, was taken by king edward i of england in 1296 and placed under the throne at westminster abbey in london. in 1950, a group of scottish nationalist students succeeded in liberating it from westminster abbey and returning it to scotland where it was placed symbolically at arbroath abbey, the site of the signing of the declaration of arbroath and an important site in the scottish nationalist cause.
filming began in june 2007 in various locations throughout scotland, wales and england. the filmmakers were given rare access to shoot scenes inside westminster abbey. the film was premiered at the edinburgh international film festival in fountainbridge, edinburgh, scotland on 21 june 2008. the film closed the  33rd annual toronto international film festival on 13 september 2008; and was presented at the hampton's international film festival in the united states. the film was released in the united kingdom on 10 october 2008 and in canada on 20 february 2009.


== plot ==
in 1950 ian hamilton (charlie cox), an ardent member of the scottish nationalist organisation, the scottish covenant association, hopes to eventually see an independent scotland. frustrated and saddened by the complacency of his fellow scots who seem to accept the status quo, he looks forward to a time when scotland is free to decide her own future. after a petition to parliament for the establishment of scottish home rule is rejected, hamilton decides to perform a symbolic act to bring national focus into the movement. with his friend, bill craig (billy boyd), he plots a scheme to bring the stone of destiny back to scotland from westminster abbey in london, where it has resided for centuries after it was taken by king edward i of england as a spoil of war in the middle ages.
hamilton and craig research the floor plans and security setup of westminster abbey and plan the theft, but once craig realises the legal implications of removing the stone and the potential impact to his personal life and career, he backs out. undaunted, hamilton decides to remove the stone by himself. he turns to john maccormick (robert carlyle), a prominent campaigner for scottish devolution, and asks for financial help with the project. although he initially refuses to take seriously hamilton's proposal and request for a mere 50, maccormick reconsiders and provides his support. later at a party, maccormick refers him to kay matheson (kate mara), a young woman with strong nationalist ideas, to help him retrieve the stone.
after meeting matheson, hamilton is soon introduced to gavin vernon (stephen mccole), a strong young man (another student) known mainly for his drinking ability. on the day of their departure for london, vernon unexpectedly brings his quiet friend alan stuart (ciaron kelly) along with him. at first hamilton opposes bringing in a fourth member, but vernon convinces him that stuart and his car will be valuable assets to the group. they agree to steal the stone on christmas eve while all of london is distracted by the holiday celebration.
the four nationalist students arrive in london the day before christmas eve and decide to steal the stone that very night, instead of their original plan of the following night. they drive to westminster abbey, but their plans are interrupted when hamilton is discovered by a watchman, who mistakes him for a homeless man and lets him go. soon after, matheson falls ill from a fever and hamilton brings her to a bed & breakfast inn to recover. the landlady is suspicious of their scottish accents and shifty behavior, and when hamilton comes for matheson at 2:00 a.m., she phones the police, who likewise suspect the young scots of being up to something, but they manage to avoid being arrested.
that night, while matheson waits in the car, hamilton, vernon, and stuart break into westminster abbey and steal the stone of scone, which breaks in two pieces in the process. seeing that the crack was made long ago and merely patched over, the group drive to the scottish border and hide the larger piece in a field. after returning to glasgow and witnessing the widespread nationalist celebration over the theft of the stone, the group learn that the stone could be permanently damaged if left to the elements. they return to the field and retrieve the stone with the aid of a group of romani people who are camped in the field.
after the two parts of the stone are reattached, the students offer to return it to the authorities at the symbolically significant arbroath abbey, the site of the signing of the declaration of arbroath. the police arrive and arrest the student, who are charged, but never prosecuted. the stone of scone was returned to london, where it remained until 1996, when it was moved to edinburgh castle "on loan" with the understanding that it would be brought back to westminster abbey for the next coronation.


== cast ==


== production ==
filming locationsarbroath, angus, scotland
bridgend, wales, uk
glasgow university, glasgow, strathclyde, scotland
glasgow, strathclyde, scotland
glenfinnan viaduct, fort william, highland, scotland
london, england, uk
oakshaw street east, paisley, renfrewshire, scotland
paisley abbey, paisley, renfrewshire, scotland
vancouver, british columbia, canada
westminster abbey, london, england, uk


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
stone of destiny received mixed reviews. from canadian film: "a heartwarming triumph for the human spirit. for the non-english, a powerful tale of courage, pride, and the innocence of youth." from variety: "this unabashedly sentimental and outright anti-english pic is stodgy as a cheap haggis with nationalistic sentimentality." from the guardian: "a wee-dram-and-bagpipes invitation to a mythical scotland of yesteryear." from channel 4: "a woeful slice of sentimental whimsy that makes braveheart look like a documentary."


=== box office ===
the 6m movie took in just 140,000 in the three weeks subsequent to its release in the uk.


== references ==
notes
citations


== external links ==
stone of destiny at imdb
stone of destiny at allmovie
stone of destiny at rotten tomatoes