stuart little 2 is a 2002 american live action/computer-animated family comedy film directed by rob minkoff and starring geena davis, hugh laurie, and jonathan lipnicki, and the voices of michael j. fox as stuart little and nathan lane as snowbell the cat. although a sequel to the 1999 film stuart little, the plot bears more resemblance to the original novel by e.b. white, in which stuart and snowbell must save a canary named margalo (voiced by melanie griffith) from an evil falcon (voiced by james woods).
the film was released to theaters on july 19, 2002 by columbia pictures, and grossed $170 million against a $120 million budget. it was followed by a third film, a direct-to-video sequel titled stuart little 3: call of the wild in 2005. however, unlike these previous two films, which were hybrids of live action and animation, the third film was entirely animated.


== plot ==
three years after his adoption, stuart little questions his abilities following a disastrous soccer match alongside his adoptive older brother george. stuart's relationship with george is strained further after stuart accidentally crashes a model airplane he and george were creating in the house. stuart's adoptive father, frederick, tries to encourage him, telling him that "every cloud has a silver lining."
later, margalo, an apparently injured canary, falls into stuart's roadster as he is driving home from school. stuart invites margalo to stay with his family for a while. however, margalo is secretly assisting her master, a greedy falcon, to steal valuables from households. orphaned as a fledgling, margalo grows reluctant to steal from the littles and becomes close friends with stuart. the falcon threatens to kill stuart unless margalo steals eleanor's wedding ring. concerned for stuart's safety, margalo complies.
when the littles discover that eleanor's ring is missing, they think it has fallen down their kitchen sink. stuart offers to be lowered down the drain on a string to get it, but the string breaks, causing him to fall. margalo saves stuart and leaves the littles' house that night in order to protect him. the next day, stuart assumes margalo has been kidnapped by the falcon and decides to rescue her with the help of the littles' cat snowbell. before he leaves, stuart asks george to lie about his whereabouts to his parents.
following advice from snowbell's alley cat friend monty, stuart and snowbell discover that the falcon resides in the pishkin building. there, stuart confronts the falcon. margalo assures stuart that although she was following the falcon's orders, she is still his friend. stuart begs margalo to come home with him, but the falcon refuses to let margalo quit her job. despite stuart's attempt to attack the falcon, he drops stuart over the side of the building, although stuart survives by landing in a passing garbage truck. the falcon captures margalo and imprisons her in a paint can as punishment. however, snowbell, who has become worried about stuart, makes his way to the building and finds margalo while the falcon is absent.
at the same time, stuart awakens on a garbage barge that was leaving new york and considers giving up until he finds his and george's broken yet still-functioning model airplane on the barge. cobbling it together using various pieces of trash, stuart repairs the plane and escapes back to new york city to rescue margalo. meanwhile, the littles discover george has lied because stuart is nowhere to be found. george tries not to break his promise until frederick says that he understands why george would make a promise to stuart, since he himself has a brother, but that if he was in danger, that would matter more than the promise itself. george eventually admits stuart was last seen at the pishkin building, prompting the littles to head out and find stuart.
meanwhile, snowbell frees margalo from the paint can, but the falcon arrives and attacks him. as he tries to push snowbell off the building, the falcon is intercepted by margalo, who threatens to toss the ring off the roof if he kills snowbell. before the falcon could reclaim the ring from margalo, stuart swoops in on his plane to catch her. the falcon catches up to the two in central park, while the littles and snowbell follow them. stuart succeeds in blinding the falcon by reflecting sunlight off his mother's ring before jumping from the plane, which crashes into falcon, clipping his wings and causing him to fall in the trash can below, where monty presumably eats him. margalo safely brings stuart back to the littles and returns eleanor's ring while snowbell also reunites with them. sometime later, margalo says goodbye to the littles and leaves to migrate south for the winter.


== cast ==


=== live-action cast ===
geena davis as mrs. eleanor little, the mother of the little family who is overprotective of stuart.
hugh laurie as mr. frederick little, the father of the little family.
jonathan lipnicki as george little, the eldest child of the little family and stuart's older brother.
anna and ashley hoelck as martha little, the infant daughter of the little family and stuart and george's younger sister.
marc john jefferies as will, george's friend and classmate.
jim doughan as stuart and george's soccer coach. doughan previously voiced lucky and played the role of detective allen in stuart little.
brad garrett as rob, a plumber called to find eleanor's ring in the kitchen sink's pipes.
amelia marshall as rita, will's mother.
ronobir lahiri as the cab driver.
maria bamford as stuart and george's teacher.
angelo massagli as wallace, one of stuart and george's soccer teammates.
kevin olson as irwin, another of stuart and george's soccer teammates.


=== voice cast ===
michael j. fox as stuart little, an anthropomorphic teenage mouse adopted as part of the little family.
melanie griffith as margalo, a canary who becomes stuart's friend.
james woods as falcon, a sadistic peregrine falcon who serves as margalo's master making margalo his slave.
nathan lane as snowbell, the family cat who is stuart's friend.
steve zahn as monty, snowbell's alley cat friend.


=== puppeteers ===


== production ==
filming began in new york city and culver city, california on march 5, 2001, and lasted until june of that year. after the september 11 attacks, scenes of the twin towers were digitally removed and certain scenes were re-shot.


== reception ==


=== critical reception ===
on review aggregator rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 81% based on 124 reviews, with an average score of 6.90/10. the critical consensus reads, "stuart little 2 is a sweet, visually impressive sequel that provides wholesome entertainment for kids." on metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 66 out of 100 based on 29 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews". audiences surveyed by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "a" on an a+ to f scale.ann hornaday wrote a positive review in the washington post, noting how the film's idealized setting makes it family-friendly. hornaday praised the vocal performances of fox, griffith, and woods in their roles as stuart, margalo, and falcon, respectively, as well as the characters' computer animation: "the animated characters engage in such natural movements and, more important, exude such subtle emotional expression that they mesh seamlessly with their live-action counterparts." tom shen of the chicago reader,  described the film as "fairly formulaic", but praised its jokes as "hilarious", especially those coming from the character of snowbell, the littles' cat.


=== box office ===
the film had an opening weekend gross of $15.1 million. the domestic total was $65 million and the worldwide total was $170 million against an estimated production budget of $120 million.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack, music from and inspired by stuart little 2, was released by epic records and sony music soundtrax on july 16, 2002 on audio cd and compact cassette. the final two tracks are score cues composed by alan silvestri.another album features the entirety of silvestri's orchestral score for the film.


=== track listing ===


== video game ==

video games based on the film were released for the playstation, game boy advance, and microsoft windows.


== accolades ==


== home media ==
stuart little 2 was released on vhs and dvd on december 10, 2002 by columbia tristar home entertainment. a blu-ray/dvd combo pack was released on june 28, 2011 alongside the first film by sony pictures home entertainment.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
stuart little 2 at imdb
stuart little 2 at allmovie
stuart little 2 at the tcm movie database