suhaag is a 1979 indian hindi-language action drama film directed by manmohan desai.  a huge box office success, the film became the highest-grossing film of 1979.the movie stars amitabh bachchan, shashi kapoor, rekha, and parveen babi in lead roles. amjad khan, nirupa roy, kader khan, ranjeet, and jeevan play supporting roles.  the music was composed by laxmikant pyarelal.
the film was remade in telugu as satyam shivam with n. t. rama rao & akkineni nageswara rao.


== plot ==
durga (nirupa roy) and vikram kapoor (amjad khan) have been married for years.  vikram has taken to crime in a big way and as a result has antagonized a rival gangster, jaggi.  durga gives birth to twins and jaggi steals one of them, and sells him to a bootlegger, pascal. durga is upset when she finds her son missing, but is devastated when vikram abandons her.  with a lot of difficulties, durga brings up her son, kishan (shashi kapoor), and has given up on finding her other son.  kishan has grown up and is now a dedicated police officer. on the other hand, pascal has exploited amit (amitabh bachchan), educated, and made him a petty criminal and alcoholic. this gets him in a confrontation with kishan but the two settle their differences and become fast friends. vikram is not aware of his two sons and wife being alive. without revealing his identity, he hires amit to kill kishan during a navratri dance at maa sherawali's temple. amit informs kishan and together with other police personnel, keep vigil. things do not go as planned; they are attacked and kishan loses his eyesight, leaving the onus on amit to try to locate the person behind this crime. full of singing, dancing, and stunts, the film has a strong moral undertone of good triumphing over evil despite any odds.


== cast ==
amitabh bachchan as amit kapoor
shashi kapoor as kishan kapoor
rekha as basanti
parveen babi as anu
nirupa roy as durga kapoor
amjad khan as vikram kapoor
ranjeet as gopal
kader khan as jaggi
jeevan as pascal
jagdish raj as inspector khan
hercules as raghu dada
krishan dhawan as lala sheth
master titto as young kishan
master ratan as young amit
moolchand as shop owner
vatsala deshmukh as jamnabai
komila virk as glamorous girl in gopal's bar


== soundtrack ==
the movie songs were great hits. mohammed rafi and laxmikantpyarelal combo created popular songs. mohammed rafi's voice was used for amitabh bachchan and shailendra singh's voice for shashi kapoor. the songs of the movie are popular till today. "ae yaar sun yaari teri" is classified as most popular song after "yeh dosti hum nahin todenge" by kishore kumar and manna dey from film sholay. "tere rab ne bana di jodi" is played in most weddings.
"tere rab ne bana di jodi" was directed in london's hyde park, with a uk based punjabi dance group from southall.


== references ==


== external links ==
suhaag at imdb