sukran is a 2005 indian tamil-language action thriller film written, produced and directed by s. a. chandrasekhar. the film stars ravi krishna and anita hassanandani, with vijay in an extended cameo as the title character. the music was composed by first-timer vijay antony with the score composed by pravin mani.


== plot ==
ravi shankar (ravi krishna) and sandhya (anita hassanandani), who are students of a college in dindigul, are in love, but sandhya faces a problem at home as her uncle is attracted to her. one day, he peeps into her bathroom while she bathes, and she complains about it to her malevolent stepmother (nalini), but she forgives and encourages him and tells her that they will one day marry. sandhya also encourages ravi, telling him that they will marry.
when sandhya's stepmother comes to know of their affair, she pokes her nose in their wheel. ravi's father (nassar), who is very caring and loving, sends them to chennai. after they reach chennai, he checks in on them, and in the middle of the phone call, he gets killed by sandhya's stepmother. after that, a corrupt police officer named mahesh (sriman) accuses ravi of murdering his own father and apprehends ravi on a complaint given by sandhya's stepmother that he had murdered his own father when he put his foot down on their affair. ravi is then put behind bars.
sandhya is persuaded to seek the help of a judge named needhi manikkam (rajan p. dev) to get a bail for ravi. manikkam, being an incorrect person, blackmails her to sleep with him, causing her to spit on his face. sandhya is taken to a palace by the police, where she gets gang-raped by mahesh, manikkam, and tamil kumaran (bobby bedi), the son of minister janardhanan (vijayan). in the meantime, an honest police officer releases ravi, so that he can save sandhya. but before ravi can reach the destination, the trio remove her clothes, bind her to the bed, and rape her by turns, which they also take a video clip of. ravi tries to save her but is unsuccessful and gets beaten by needhi manikkam's henchmen. after some time, sandhya becomes unconscious. ravi is also unconscious after a severe beating from the goons and getting thrown into the gallows.
after a series of events, sandhya decides to commit suicide, because she says that she has undergone a lot of pain and anguish, and the pain is so terrible that she cannot forget it until she dies. ravi is hesitant to let her go because he already lost his parents and he does not want to lose her. he says that they have lived together and he says that now that she has decided to die, they should die together because even during death they should not part. at this juncture, here arrives a criminal lawyer named sukran (vijay), who saves them, teaches them the value of life and advises them to face all the troubles boldly. after that, he tells them to start a new life and to be happy and successful by the time they meet again. they get jobs and money, marry, move into a small house, and have a normal life. one day, when sandhya is in her nightdress, mahesh, manikkam, and kumaran force her again, causing the couple to get harassed by the police. the incident causes sandhya to be arrested on false charges of prostitution. all efforts by ravi to get her out on bail are futile. an agitated ravi shoots mahesh, manikkam, kumaran, and sandhya's stepmother dead and escapes with sandhya from the court.
sukran steps in and promises to save the couple. he appears on ravi's behalf and puts forward enough evidence to help him out. he also eventually kills janardhanan, who was responsible for all the wrongdoings and also due to his previous disputes with him. after that, sukran himself surrenders to the police, stating that although janardhanan was a pervert, he should not have done the murder in front of the judge.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by debutant vijay antony.


== release ==
the film was released worldwide on 18 february 2005. prior to its release, the film was awarded an a certificate by the indian censor board with 22 cuts, while the uae censors objected to the film's content and asked for deletion of footage amounting to 32 minutes, not following which the film got banned. the satellite rights of the film were sold to jaya tv


== critical reception ==
the hindu wrote "producer, writer and director s. a. chandrasekaran returns after a hiatus, youthful in imagination and agile in execution  at times too much so [..] chandrasekaran's yen for courtroom drama, make "sukran" a cocktail of sorts." thiraipadam wrote "vijay's heroic turn and a lacklustre courtroom climax pull down what is until then a realistic story of lovers on the run."


== references ==


== external links ==
sukran at imdb