summer wishes, winter dreams is a 1973 american technicolor drama film directed by gilbert cates, starring joanne woodward, martin balsam, sylvia sidney, and tresa hughes, and written by stewart stern. it tells the story of a new york city housewife who rethinks her relationships with her husband, her children, and her mother.
summer wishes, winter dreams garnered academy award nominations for best actress in a leading role (joanne woodward) and best actress in a supporting role (sylvia sidney).


== plot summary ==
rita walden is a depressed, middle-aged new yorker. always tired, rita is prone to nightmares, and when she does dream more pleasant thoughts, they are of her childhood on the family farm. in her mind, she settled for second best when she married her ophthalmologist husband, harry, as she still thinks about what life would have been like with the older farm boy on whom she had a crush at age 12. she is constantly bickering with her mother, her sister betty, and her grown-up daughter anna, who has issues of her own. rita is estranged from her son bobby; she is in denial about his homosexual orientation. after rita's mother dies suddenly, rita is on the verge of a nervous breakdown in dealing with her mother's estate, especially when the family talks about selling her beloved farm, which she still intends to pass on to bobby. harry thinks that a european vacation would help rita clear her mind, with the possibility of visiting bobby, who is currently living in amsterdam. although rita faces some crises on the trip, many of her conflicts do ease after she sees harry revisit bastogne for the first time since his days in world war ii.


== cast ==
joanne woodward as rita walden
martin balsam as harry walden
sylvia sidney as mrs. pritchett
tresa hughes as betty goody
dori brenner (in her screen debut) as anna
ron rickards as bobby walden
win forman as fred goody
peter marklin as joel
nancy andrews as mrs. hungerford
minerva pious as woman in theatre
sol frieder as man in theatre
helen ludlam as grandmother
grant code as grandfather
gaetano lisi as student in theatre
lee jackson as carl


== see also ==
list of american films of 1973


== external links ==
summer wishes, winter dreams at imdb
summer wishes, winter dreams at allmovie
summer wishes, winter dreams at the tcm movie database
summer wishes, winter dreams at the american film institute catalog