super mario bros. (also known as super mario bros.: the movie) is a 1993 adventure comedy film loosely based on the mario video game series by nintendo. it is the first feature-length live-action film to be based on a video game. the film was directed by the husband-and-wife team of rocky morton and annabel jankel, written by parker bennett, terry runt and ed solomon and distributed by buena vista pictures through hollywood pictures. its story follows the mario brothers (bob hoskins and john leguizamo) in their quest to rescue princess daisy (samantha mathis) from a dystopic parallel universe ruled by the ruthless president koopa (dennis hopper).
given free creative license by nintendo, the screenwriters envisioned the film as a subversive comedy with a "weird and dark" tone, with influences from ghostbusters (1984) and the wizard of oz (1939). the setting was primarily inspired by the game super mario world (1990), with other elements drawn from fairy tales and contemporary american culture. the production innovated and introduced many filmmaking techniques now considered pivotal in the transition from practical to digital visual effects, including the use of autodesk flame. filming took place from may to july of 1992.
released on may 28, 1993, the film was a critical and financial failure, grossing $38.9 million worldwide, against a budget of $4248 million. reviewers praised the innovative special effects, creative artistic direction, and the performances of its actors, but criticized the confusing narrative, lack of similarity to the games and inconsistent tone. mario creator shigeru miyamoto felt the film tried too hard to replicate the games instead of being a good film.despite a poor reception, the film gained a cult following in later years and has been recently regarded as a cult classic. in 2012, a webcomic sequel was produced in collaboration with bennett. it remained the only live-action film based on a nintendo game property until pokmon: detective pikachu (2019). as of 2018, an animated mario reboot film was in development by universal pictures through its illumination division, with miyamoto serving as co-producer alongside illumination founder chris meledandri, with the film's release slated for 2022.


== plot ==
about 65 million years ago, a meteorite crashes into the earth, killing the dinosaurs and splitting the universe into two parallel dimensions. the surviving dinosaurs cross into a new dimension and evolve into a humanoid race.
twenty years ago, a mysterious woman leaves a large egg, along with a rock, at a catholic orphanage. as she attempts to leave, she is accosted by president koopa, who demands the location of the rock. rocks then fall onto the woman, killing her. the egg hatches, containing an infant girl.
in the present, italian-american plumbers mario and luigi live in brooklyn, new york. they are on the verge of being driven out of business by the mafia-operated scapelli construction company led by anthony scapelli. luigi falls for nyu student daisy, who is digging under the brooklyn bridge for dinosaur bones. after a date, daisy takes luigi back to the bridge only to witness two of scapelli's men sabotaging it by leaving the water pipes open. mario and luigi manage to fix it but are knocked unconscious by iggy and spike, koopa's henchmen and cousins, who kidnap daisy. mario and luigi awaken and pursue them through an interdimensional portal that leads them to dinohattan.
iggy and spike realize they didn't bring daisy's rock, a meteorite fragment which koopa is trying to get in order to merge his world with the human world. it is then revealed that daisy is the long-lost princess of the other dimension. when koopa overthrew daisy's father as king and devolved him into fungus, her mother the queen took her to brooklyn. the portal was then sealed, but scapelli's men inadvertently reopened the portal when they blasted the cave. koopa sends spike and iggy to find daisy and the rock to merge the dimensions and make him dictator of both worlds. however, after koopa subjects them to one of his experiments to make them more intelligent, spike and iggy realize koopa's evil intentions and side with the mario bros. daisy is taken to koopa-tower, where she meets yoshi. koopa informs daisy that she descended from the dinosaurs, believing only daisy can merge the worlds because of her royal heritage. eventually, the mario bros. rescue daisy with the help of toad, a good-natured guitarist who was devolved into a goomba as punishment.
eventually, the two worlds merge and koopa devolves scapelli into a chimpanzee before going after mario, but luigi and daisy manage to remove the fragment from the meteorite and the worlds separate again. in dinohattan, mario confronts koopa and eventually defeats him when he and luigi fire their devolution guns at koopa and blast him with a bob-omb. koopa, now transformed into a ferocious, semi-humanoid tyrannosaurus, attempts to kill the mario bros., but they destroy him once and for all by devolving him into an actual tyrannosaurus rex, then primeval slime. daisy's father is restored as king after koopa's defeat. the citizens celebrate and immediately destroy anything with koopa's likeness. luigi professes his love for daisy and wants her to come to brooklyn with him, but daisy, have found her both home and father, decides to stay in dinohattan. crestfallen, luigi kisses daisy goodbye as he and mario return home to brooklyn, with daisy watching them leave. three weeks later, the mario bros. are getting ready for dinner when their story comes on the news and the anchorman says they should be called the "super mario bros." daisy then arrives and asks the mario bros to help her on a new mission.
in a post-credits scene, two japanese business executives propose making a video game based on iggy and spike, now on earth, who decide on the title the super koopa cousins.


== cast ==


== production ==


=== development ===
the suggestion for a film based on the super mario bros. was first put forward by roland joff during a script meeting at his production company lightmotive. joff met the nintendo of america president and hiroshi yamauchi's son-in law, minoru arakawa. he presented arakawa with an initial draft of the script. one month after their meeting, joff went to nintendo's headquarters in kyoto to meet hiroshi yamauchi. he pitched to yamauchi the storyline which led to nintendo receiving interest in the project. joff left with a $2 million contract giving the temporary control of the character of mario over to joff. nintendo retained merchandising rights for the film through a "creative partnership" with lightmotive.when yamauchi asked joff why nintendo should sell the rights to lightmotive over a major company joff assured that nintendo would have more control over the film. however, nintendo had no interest in creative control and believed the mario brand was strong enough to allow an experiment with an outside industry. "i think they looked at the movie as some sort of strange creature that was kind of rather intriguing to see if we could walk or not", said joff. joff wondered, "how do we catch this wonderful mixture of images and inputs and strangeness?" the first screenplay was written by oscar-winning screenwriter barry morrow. his story followed brothers mario and luigi on an existential road trip so similar to morrow's prior rain man that production titled the script "drain man". morrow described his screenplay as "a study in contrast, like laurel and hardy or abbot and costello", that would have "an odyssey and a quest" like the game itself. co-producer fred caruso later said that morrow's story was "more of a serious drama piece as opposed to a fun comedy".screenwriters jim jennewein and tom s. parker were brought on next to write a more traditional adaptation. "so right away we knew that the best way to do this is to essentially have a journey into this world, not unlike the wizard of oz", said jennewein. his and parker's take on the story was to subvert fairy tale clichs and satirize them, as well as focus on the relationship between mario and luigi. jennewein said, "essentially what we did was what shrek did [...] and we knew the story had to be about the brothers and that the emotional through-line would be about the brothers." greg beeman of license to drive was attached to direct and development had already moved into pre-production, but the failure of beeman's recent mom and dad save the world led to his dismissal by nervous producers. joff then offered harold ramis the director position, but though he was a fan of the video game, ramis declined the opportunity, which he would later reflect being "glad" about and which the associated press would observe was his "smartest career decision".joff said, "we tried some various avenues that didn't work, that came up too medieval or somehow wasn't the right thing. i felt the project was taking a wrong turn [...] and that's when i began thinking of max headroom." joff traveled to rome to meet with creators rocky morton and annabel jankel. morton said, "we come from the tim burton school of filmmaking, because our background is in animation and comic books [...] so we started off basing everything in reality, and then tried to have fun and exaggerate it as much as possible." joff, morton, and jankel agreed their approach in adapting the video games should follow the darker tone popularized by the 1989 batman and 1990 teenage mutant ninja turtles. joff said, "this wasn't snow white and the seven dinosaurs [...] the dino world was dark. we didn't want to hold back." morton described the film as a prequel to the video games that tells the "true story" behind nintendo's inspiration. joff viewed the games as a "mixture of japanese fairy tales and bits of modern america", and wanted to create a "slightly mythic vision of new york". screenwriter parker bennett elaborated: "our take on it was that nintendo interpreted the events from our story and came up with the video game. we basically worked backwards."the concept of a parallel universe inhabited by dinosaurs was inspired by dinosaur land from the recently released super mario world. jankel envisioned the parallel dimension as "[...] a whole world with a reptile point-of-view, dominated by aggressive, primordial behavior and basic instincts", while morton considered the ecological and technological consequences of a dinosaur society that holds fossil fuels sacred. joff noted, "it's a wonderful parody of new york and heavy industry [...] we call it the new brutalism." screenwriters parker bennett and terry runt were tasked with balancing comedy with the darker tone: bennett said, "ghostbusters was the model [...] we were aiming towards funny, but kind of weird and dark."despite working well with the directors, bennett and runt were dismissed by the producers for being too comedic and british writing team dick clement and ian la frenais were brought on to deliver a more adult and feminist tone. princess daisy and lena's roles were expanded while bertha, a black woman, was introduced. this script signed the main cast, finally convincing bob hoskins to take on the role of mario. the film officially moved into pre-production. however, producers joff and eberts feared the project had both skewed too far from the intended young adult/family audiences, and had become too effects-heavy to film within budget, so without informing directors morton and jankel or the signed cast they hired screenwriters ed solomon and ryan rowe to provide a more family-friendly script with more restrained effects requirements. the script doctoring was partially motivated by disney purchasing the film's distribution rights. the cast only discovered the new screenplay upon arriving in wilmington, nc.
directors morton and jankel considered leaving the project, but decided to stay after talking it over with each other and realizing that no other director could at that point come on and understand the material enough to properly adapt it. morton and jankel also felt they owed it to the cast/crew and believed they could reclaim their vision during production. rowe returned home to work on another project, but solomon remained for several weeks to provide additional rewrites. without invitation, bennett and runt took a road trip to wilmington whereupon they were immediately re-hired. they would remain through production to provide final rewrites, dialogue for adr, and the dialogue for the expository animated dinosaur opening. the intelligent fungus was inspired by both the mushroom kingdom from the games and tabloid reports of a discovered gigantic fungus. production designer david snyder recalled: "as each script developed the fungus was sort of a metaphor for the mushroom element in a nintendo game." joff reflected, "for me a screenplay is never finished [...] you work a screenplay all the time. when you bring actors in a screenplay goes through another evolution. so you can say that rather like the fungus in the movie the screenplay constantly evolves."


=== casting ===
after securing the rights to the film, lightmotive went to work finding the casting for the characters. initially, dustin hoffman expressed interest in portraying mario. however, arakawa didn't believe that he was the right man for the role. danny devito was offered both the role of mario and the director's mantle. arnold schwarzenegger and michael keaton were both approached to play koopa, but both turned down the role. tom hanks was considered for the role of luigi, but a string of recent box-office failures dropped him from consideration. actors bob hoskins and john leguizamo were ultimately cast as mario and luigi.
initially, hoskins disliked the script and did not want to do another children's film: "i'd done roger rabbit. i'd done hook. i didn't want to become like dick van dyke." hoskins wondered how he would prepare for the role, saying "i'm the right shape. i've got a mustache. i worked as a plumber's apprentice for about three weeks and set the plumber's boots on fire with a blowtorch." producer roland joff kept sending hoskins new script revisions until finally the actor agreed. co-director jankel said, "bob was a no brainer [...] unabashed shameless physical type casting. bob was brilliant at assuming the character, in a slightly amplified way that would be in keeping with his supposed subsequent game iteration.""what i liked about the script was the adventure and the action that was involved", said leguizamo. he joked that "you always see a lot of italians playing latin people, like al pacino did in scarface. now it's our turn!" jankel said, "john was a brilliant up and coming stand-up comic and actor [...] we went to see him at second city, and we were 100% sold. he had a wonderful combination of empathy and irreverence but was entirely without guile. it was not specifically scripted to be cast with a hispanic or latino actor, but it made perfect sense that the mario bros. themselves should be this contemporary unconventional family, so the small unit of just two, couldn't be pegged as one thing or another." according to mojo nixon, he was cast in the role of toad because the production wanted an actual musician for the character, but their first choice tom waits was unavailable. nixon's agent pitched him to casting as a "third-rate tom waitsfor half-price".


=== filming ===
several weeks before shooting was to begin, disney purchased the distribution rights to the film and demanded significant rewrites. morton said the final result was a script that was not at all like the script that he, jankel, and the cast had signed on to film, and that the tone of the new script was not at all compatible with the sets, which had already been built. leguizamo said, "it's eight-year-olds who play the game and that's where the movie needed to be aimed. [...] but [the directors] kept trying to insert new material. they shot scenes with strippers and with other sexually-explicit content, which all got edited out anyway."principal photography of the film began on may 6, 1992, and wrapped on july 27, 1992. contrary to many reports, directors morton and jankel did complete the contracted shooting of the film, though director of photography dean semler and several second unit directors provided additional reshoots. morton and jankel would even provide such instructions as what apeture the camera had to be at, to which semler responded by questioning his employment on the production. morton said, "i was locked out of the editing room [...] i had to get the dga to come and help me get back into the editing room. i tried to get the editor to cut it digitally, but they refused. they wanted to edit on moviola and steenbeck machines, so the process was laboriously slow, which didn't help us get the special effect cut in on time."


==== production design ====
production designer david snyder approached turning the mushroom kingdom into the live-action setting of dinohattan (also known as dinoyawk or koopaville) by "[taking] all the elements that are in the video game" and "[turning] them into a metaphor and [combining] them with 3-d and real characters". "koopa gets a single glimpse of manhattan at the beginning of the movie", according to art director walter p. martishius. this inspires koopa to recreate dinohattan, but "he didn't get it quite right. the place is twisted, off balance, different. and he doesn't even know it."co-producer fred caruso located the deserted ideal cement co. plant in wilmington, north carolina. snyder found the location a unique opportunity: "in this building, with all the existing concrete structure, we could hang the scenery from the structure, and not have to build scaffolding, and could integrate the concrete structure into the film's design." snyder said: "in blade runner (a film he was the art director on), the street was one level. here i have a street level, a pedestrian walkway and above that koopa's room, plus six or seven stories in height. i have more flexibility in layering of levels. it's a major, major opportunity. you'd never be able to do this on a sound stage. there isn't a sound stage big enough." "we've designed this film with the idea of looking at new york while on some mind-altering drugs." the intelligent fungus was created from fishing lure base and hot glue by prop designer simon murton.


==== creatures effects ====
lead creatures designer and supervisor patrick tatopoulos was aware of the concurrent jurassic park production, so consciously designed the dinosaurs for super mario bros. to be more cute and cartoon-like with inspiration from beetlejuice. tatopolous described yoshi as "an abstract, fantasy t. rex", and designed the baby dinosaur with large eyes to evoke a softer and less menacing quality. lead sfx sculptor mark maitre compared yoshi to a cross between "a tyrannosaurus rex and an iguana". four versions of the yoshi puppet were built: a stand-in, a wireless model, a half-puppet for the tongue, and a fully functional model. the fully functional puppet utilized 70 cables and nine operators, costing us$500,000 (equivalent to $910,956 in 2019). producers from jurassic park visited the set and were so impressed with the yoshi puppet they briefly considered hiring its engineers for a second jurassic park creatures shop. originally, the goombas were only background characters, but their final designs were so impressive that directors morton and jankel promoted them to main characters with major stunts.


==== visual effects ====
super mario bros. innovated and introduced many techniques considered pivotal in the transition from practical to digital visual effects. it is the first film to have used the software autodesk flame, now an industry standard. it is also the first film scanned with a digital intermediate, allowing for the compositing of more than 700 visual effects shots. the disintegration effect for the inter-dimensional merge was inspired by the transporter from star trek.


== reception ==


=== box office ===
the film grossed $20,915,465 in the united states and canada, selling approximately 5.059 million tickets in the united states. in asia, the film earned 300 million ($2.7 million) from distribution rentals in japan, and sold 106,083 tickets in the south korean capital of seoul city. in europe, the film grossed 2,823,116 ($4,232,558) in the united kingdom, sold 391,800 tickets in france, and sold 290,098 tickets in germany. in total, the film grossed $17,997,000 internationally for a worldwide total of $38,912,465.


=== critical response ===
on rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 24% based on 41 reviews, with an average rating of 4.00/10. the site's consensus states: "despite flashy sets and special effects, super mario bros. is too light on story and substance to be anything more than a novelty." audiences surveyed by cinemascore gave the film a grade of "b+" on scale of a+ to f.michael wilmington of the los angeles times said "it's a movie split in two: wildly accomplished on one level, wildly deficient on another." he graded the film high marks for its effects and the "sheer density and bravura of the production design", but ultimately provided a low final score for poor writing. janet maslin of the new york times also commended the film's visual effects, and suggested bob hoskins could "handle any role with grace and good humor", but concluded "it doesn't have the jaunty hop-and-zap spirit of the nintendo video game from which it takes  ahem  its inspiration.". "the movie's no stinker", asserted mark caro of the chicago tribune, who lauded hoskins and leguizamo for their brotherly dynamic and called the goombas "wonderfully daffy supporting characters". hal hinson of the washington post likewise praised the film for its performances and creatures effects, and proclaimed "in short, it's a blast." this quote would later be used on the film's home media releases.
gene siskel of the chicago tribune and roger ebert of the chicago sun-times gave the film two thumbs down on the television program siskel & ebert at the movies, citing tonal inconsistency and lack of narrative, and the film was on their list for one of the worst films of 1993. stephen hunter of the baltimore sun thought yoshi had "more personality than all the human actors put together". hal hinson of the washington post declared the goombas "the best movie heavies since the flying monkeys in the wizard of oz."
super mario bros. was one of four disney-related films under consideration for the best visual effects award at the 66th academy awards; though the academy ultimately nominated the nightmare before christmas.


== home media ==
the film was first released on vhs in 1994 and on dvd in the united states in 2003 and again in 2010. the quality of the dvd release was widely derided for being non-anamorphic and only english dolby digital 5.1. the film was released on blu-ray by second sight films in the united kingdom on november 3, 2014. the film was re-released as a limited edition blu-ray steelbook by zavvi in the uk in february 2017. the film was released on blu-ray in japan on december 22, 2017, which featured the same features and extras as second sight films' release. as of 2018, fan website super mario bros.: the movie archive is working with original vfx supervisor christopher f. woods on a 4k resolution transfer and restoration for a future region a release.


== legacy ==
in a 2007 interview, hoskins said super mario bros. was "the worst thing i ever did" and that "the whole experience was a nightmare". he and leguizamo would get drunk before each day of filming and would continue to drink between takes. in a 2011 interview, he was asked, "what is the worst job you've done?", "what has been your biggest disappointment?", and "if you could edit your past, what would you change?" his answer to all three was super mario bros. however, his son, jack hoskins, is a fan of the film and praised his performance.leguizamo prepared a video message for the film's 20th anniversary in 2013, saying "i'm glad people appreciate the movie [...] it was the first, nobody had ever done it before [...] i'm proud of the movie in retrospect." hopper disparaged the production, recounting in 2008: "it was a nightmare, very honestly, that movie. it was a husband-and-wife directing team who were both control freaks and wouldn't talk before they made decisions. anyway, i was supposed to go down there for five weeks, and i was there for 17. it was so over budget." mathis said in 2018 for the film's 25th anniversary: "there are a lot of people who are really excited to meet me because i was princess daisy. that's all you can ask for as an actorthat your work, and something you were part of, left an impression on people and makes them feel good."co-director morton reflected on the movie in 2016 as a "harrowing" experience. morton felt "very uneasy" being put in the position of having to defend the new script. in addition, working with dennis hopper was "really, really hard. really hard. i don't think [hopper] had a clue what was going on." he described the experience as humiliating, but morton was proud of the film's originality. speaking with game informer for the film's 20th anniversary, morton said: "i wanted parents to really get into it. at that time, there was a very hardcore movement against video games, and a lot of anti-video games sentiment. i wanted to make a film that would open it up and get parents interested in video games."co-director jankel said, "i do feel in my heart, it was a hell of an achievement to have made it, under those circumstances, and it has in time, happily, achieved cult status [...] i am often hearing how many people loved it growing up, watch it repeatedly, and are genuine fans." producer joff remains proud: "it's not that i defend the movie, it's just that, in its own extraordinary way, it was an interesting and rich artefact and has earned its place. it has strange cult status." joff never heard what yamauchi or nintendo thought of the finished product. he said, "they never phoned up to complain [...] they were very polite, nintendo." mario creator shigeru miyamoto said: "[in] the end, it was a very fun project that they put a lot of effort into [...] the one thing that i still have some regrets about is that the movie may have tried to get a little too close to what the mario bros. video games were. and in that sense, it became a movie that was about a video game, rather than being an entertaining movie in and of itself."


=== cultural impact ===
ryan hoss, a longtime fan of the film, launched the fansite super mario bros.: the movie archive in 2007, saying to playboy for the film's 25th anniversary that "i had this collection, and the internet was growing in terms of fansites during that era, the late '90s, and i always knew the mario bros. movie was misunderstood and a sore spot in people's mindsat least, the way it was being portrayed on the internet, the 'worst movie ever' kind of deal." he characterized the site: "it's a way to celebrate the film itself and showcase the work of all the people who had a part in itwarts and all, good and bad."in 2010 steven applebaum joined the site as editor-in-chief to help collect production materials and organize interviews. he said, "most of the [cast and crew] were very happy about it because, at the time, it was a very revolutionary movie [...] they were introducing a lot of great special effects that hadn't been done before, and they had these really talented actors, and it was a project they were proud to work on. [...] giving them a chance to talk about everything they did, it really helped them to share what they contributed and what they felt was important to the industry." the film returned to theaters through fan efforts in 2012, and in 2013 for the 20th anniversary. the nintendo power 20th anniversary retrospective issue states that the fact that the film was maderegardless of qualityshows how much the game series had impacted popular culture.


=== themes ===
thomas leitch has written that super mario bros. is an example of postliterary adaptation and that it "drops facetious references" to the wizard of oz, star wars, and doctor zhivago. stephen hunter of the baltimore sun compared the goombas to the winged monkeys of the wizard of oz, suggesting they similarly evoke a "mix of pity and terror". the phrase "trust the fungus" from the film has been compared to "may the force be with you" from star wars, while dr. lori norton-meier wrote in the journal of adolescent & adult literacy that the film is "a tool that allows students to understand content in new and intellectually challenging ways".


=== sequel webcomic ===
in 2013, fansite editors steven applebaum and ryan hoss teamed with one of the film's original screenwriters, parker bennett, on a fanfiction webcomic sequel. development on the sequel began after a 2010 interview in which bennett admitted the sequel hook was more an homage to the ending of the original back to the future and was not a serious indication of a potential continuation. however, applebaum and hoss later asked bennett what he would have done if given the opportunity and bennett provided broad points about the consequences of the first film and the themes that they would have explored.the adventure picks up with mario and luigi returning to dinohattan to aid daisy in defeating mad scientist wart, the final boss from super mario bros. 2. "we did heavily discuss the world of the film, from its backstory to the character's motivations", says applebaum. bennett provided general direction before "[passing] the torch" to applebaum and hoss.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack, released on may 10, 1993 by capitol records, featured two songs from roxette: "almost unreal", which was released as a single, and "2 cinnamon street", which is an alternate version of the song "cinnamon street" from roxette's album tourism. the music video for "almost unreal" was inspired by the film, featuring scenes from the film and a de-evolution theme. "almost unreal" was originally written for the film hocus pocus, but was never used and ended up attached to the mario film instead. the change angered roxette co-founder per gessle.the film's score was composed by alan silvestri and has not been officially released.
george clinton, who covered the was (not was) song "walk the dinosaur", released a single in 1993 that contains various other versions of the same song, including a "club remix", a "funky goomba remix", a "goomba dub mix" and an instrumental version.

* these tracks were not included in the u.s. and canada releases, only on the international versions of the album.


== reboot ==
rumors of a theatrical animated mario film began in late 2014, with leaked emails between film producer avi arad and sony pictures head tom rothman suggesting that sony would be producing the film. on november 14, 2017, universal pictures and illumination announced they will release a computer-animated mario film. on january 31, 2018, nintendo of america announced its partnership with illumination, stating that the film will be co-produced by shigeru miyamoto and chris meledandri. on november 6, 2018, meledandri stated that the film will be a "priority" for the studio, with a tentative 2022 release date, while reaffirming that miyamoto will be involved "front and center" in the film's creation. speaking of the challenge of adapting the series into an animated film, meledandri stated the film would be "an ambitious task...taking things that are so thin in their original form and finding depth that doesnt compromise what generations of fans love about mario, but also feels organic to the iconography and can support a three-act structure." on january 31, 2020, nintendo stated that the film is "moving along smoothly" for release in 2022. nintendo owns the rights to the film, and both nintendo and universal funded production.


== references ==
 text in this article was copied from super mario bros. (film) at the super mario wiki, which is released under a creative commons attribution-share alike 3.0 (unported) (cc-by-sa 3.0) license.


== external links ==
super mario bros. at imdb
super mario bros. at box office mojo
super mario bros. the movie archive