super 8 is a 2011 american monster thriller film written and directed by j. j. abrams and produced by steven spielberg. the film stars joel courtney, elle fanning, and kyle chandler and tells the story of a group of young teenagers who are filming their own super 8 movie when a train derails, releasing a dangerous presence into their town. the film was shot in weirton, west virginia and surrounding areas, portraying the fictional town of lillian, ohio.
super 8 was released on june 10, 2011, in conventional and imax theaters in the united states. it received generally positive reviews from critics, who praised its nostalgic elements, visual effects, musical score and for the performances of the cast, in particular,  both fanning and newcomer courtney's acting was cited, while also being compared to such thematically similar films as e.t., stand by me, and the goonies, featuring a darker interpretation of those iconic premises. super 8 was also a commercial success, grossing over $260 million against a $50 million budget. the film received several awards and nominations, primarily in technical and special effects categories, giacchino's musical score, as well as for courtney and fanning's performances.


== plot ==
in 1979, deputy sheriff jack lamb of lillian, ohio, and his 14-year-old son joe, mourn wife and mother elizabeth, killed in a workplace accident. jack blames louis dainard, whose shift she was covering as he showed up drunk. all joe has left of her is a locket.
four months later joe's friend charles is making a zombie movie for a super 8 film competition. he enlists joe's help along with friends preston, martin, and cary, as well as dainard's daughter, alice. though their fathers would be furious, joe and alice become close.
while filming at a train depot at midnight, a train approaches and a pickup truck rams the train head-on, derailing it and destroying the depot. the children are separated in the chaos. joe sees the door of a train wagon violently thrown off. the kids regroup and find crates of strange white cubes amid the wreckage before discovering the truck driver to be their biology teacher dr. woodward. barely alive, he warns them at gunpoint to forget what they have seen. they flee as a convoy from the local air force base, led by col. nelec, arrives. nelec finds an empty super 8 film box.
in the following days the town experiences strange events; the dogs run away, several townspeople go missing, the electrical power fluctuates, and electronic items are stolen. deputy lamb approaches nelec but nelec has him arrested and orders flamethrowers to start a wildfire as an excuse to evacuate the residents to the base. joe and charles watch their derailment footage and see that a large creature escaped the train. nelec confronts woodward in a military hospital for information about the creature, but when woodward rebukes him, nelec has him killed.
alice's father tells joe the creature has abducted her. joe, charles, martin, and cary persuade jen, charles' older sister, to flirt with donny so he can get them into town to rescue alice. breaking into dr. woodward's trailer they find documents and a film from his time as a government researcher.
the film reveals the air force captured an alien when it crash-landed in 1958, and experimented on it while withholding its ship composed of the strange white cubes, allowing it to shape-shift. the alien had established a psychic connection with woodward, convincing him to help it escape earth, but nelec sabotaged, discredited, and discharged woodward. nelec captures the kids but the alien kills nelec and the airmen, allowing the kids to escape. lamb escapes and agrees with dainard to put their differences aside to save their kids.
the military attacks the alien but their hardware goes haywire in its presence, resulting in significant collateral damage. joe and cary find a massive tunnel system under the town. the missing townfolk, including alice, are hanging unconscious from the ceiling of a cavern where the alien is creating a device from the stolen electronics attached to the base of the water tower. using firecrackers as a distraction, joe frees alice and the others. the alien grabs joe, who quietly speaks to it, saying "bad things happen" but that it "can still live". the alien allows them to return to the surface.
everyone watches as metal objects from all over town are pulled to the top of the tower by an unknown force. the white cubes reassemble as the spaceship and, as the alien enters it, the locket in joe's pocket is drawn toward the tower. after a moment, he lets it go, completing the ship. as the ship rises into space, joe takes alice's hand.
the detective-zombie short film the children were making in super 8 rolls runs at the end of the movie beside the credit roll. in it, charles asks for his short film "the case" to be picked for a local film festival before being attacked by alice as a zombie.


== cast ==


== production ==


=== development ===

j.j. abrams had the idea to start a film by showing a factory's "accident-free" sign long before he came up with the rest of the ideas for the film. super 8 was actually the combination of two ideas; one for a film about kids making their own movie during the 1970s, and another for a blockbuster alien invasion film. abrams combined the ideas, worried that the former would not attract enough attendance.
abrams and spielberg collaborated in a storytelling committee to come up with the story for the film. the film was initially reported to be either a sequel or prequel to the 2008 film cloverfield, but this was quickly denied by abrams. primary photography began in fall (september/october) 2010. the teaser itself was filmed separately in april. super 8 is the first original j. j. abrams film project produced by amblin entertainment, bad robot productions, and paramount pictures.abrams wanted to find new faces to play the parts in his movie. he conducted a national talent search in order to find the child actors to play each of the leading roles. courtney (who was hoping to land a part in a commercial) was picked out of many boys because abrams found something "different" in him. riley griffiths sent abrams a tape of himself in order to land the part of charles.


=== filming ===
filming took place in weirton, west virginia, from september to october 2010. to promote the film, valve created a short video game segment and released it alongside the windows and mac versions of portal 2.abrams' original plan was to film all of the sequences for the film-within-a-film, "the case", in super-8 using pro8mm stock and cameras. however, this approach proved unsuccessful, as visual effects house industrial light and magic found it impossible to integrate cgi into the footage due to the format's graininess. for sequences involving cgi, cinematographer larry fong used super-16 instead.


=== soundtrack ===
the score for the film was composed by michael giacchino, abrams' long-time collaborator. the soundtrack was released on august 2, 2011, by varse sarabande. it won the 2012 saturn award for best music.
during the ending credits, the songs "don't bring me down" by electric light orchestra and "my sharona" by the knack are featured. the blondie song "heart of glass" and the cars song "bye bye love" are also featured in the film.

all music is composed by michael giacchino (although track 33, "the case", is credited on the liner notes to the film character charles kaznyk).


=== viral marketing campaign ===
like cloverfield, an earlier j. j. abrams-produced film, super 8 was promoted through an extensive viral marketing campaign. the first trailer for the movie was attached to iron man 2, released in may 2010. the trailer gave the premise of a section of area 51 being closed down in 1979 and its contents being transported by freight train to ohio. a pickup truck drives into the oncoming train, derailing it, and one of the carriages is smashed open while a super 8 camera films. fans analyzing the trailer found a hidden message, "scariest thing i ever saw", contained in the final frames of the trailer. this led to a website, www.scariestthingieversaw.com, which simulated the interface of a pdp-11 and contained various clues to the film's story-line; the computer was eventually revealed to belong to josh woodward, the son of dr. woodward, who is trying to find out what happened to his father. another viral website, www.rocketpoppeteers.com, was also found, which like slusho from cloverfield plays no direct part in the film but is indirectly related. the official super 8 website also contained an "editing room" section, which asked users to find various clips from around the web and piece them together. when completed, the reel makes up the film found by the kids in dr. woodward's trailer, showing the ship disintegrating into individual white cubes, and the alien reaching through the window of its cage and snatching dr. woodward. the video game portal 2 contains an interactive trailer placing the player on board the train before it derails, and showing the carriage being smashed open and the roar of the alien within.


== release ==
the film was released on june 9, 2011, in australia; june 10, 2011, in the united states; and august 5, 2011, in the united kingdom. on june 8, paramount also launched a super 8 sneak peek twitter promotion, offering fans a chance to purchase tickets for an advance screening, taking place on june 9, 2011, in the united states. the film opened at #1 in the u.s. box office for that weekend, grossing about $35 million.


=== home media ===
the film was released on blu-ray and dvd on november 22, 2011. the release was produced as a combo pack with a digital copy, including nine bonus features and fourteen deleted scenes. a 4k blu-ray edition is set to be released on its tenth anniversary (may 24, 2021).


== reception ==


=== box office ===
super 8 had a production budget of $50 million. it was commercially released on june 10, 2011. in the united states and canada, it opened in 3,379 theaters and grossed over $35.4 million on its opening weekend, ranking first at the box office. the film grossed $127 million in north america with a worldwide total of some $260 million.


=== critical response ===
on the film-critics aggregator rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 81% based on 290 reviews, and an average score of 7.30/10. the website's critical consensus reads, "it may evoke memories of classic summer blockbusters a little too eagerly for some, but super 8 has thrills, visual dazzle, and emotional depth to spare." metacritic, which assigns a weighted average score based on reviews from critics, gives the film a score of 72 out of 100 based on 41 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".chris sosa of gather gave the film an a rating, calling it, "a gripping and exciting tale of finding one's place in the world amidst tragedy". his review concluded, "while the genre-bending occasionally unsettles, the film's genuine and emotionally gripping nature make its journey believable."roger ebert gave the film three and a half stars out of four and said, "super 8 is a wonderful film, nostalgia not for a time but for a style of film-making, when shell-shocked young audiences were told a story and not pounded over the head with aggressive action. abrams treats early adolescence with tenderness and affection." richard corliss of time gave it a similarly positive review, calling it "the year's most thrilling, feeling mainstream movie". he then named it one of the top 10 best movies of 2011. jamie graham of total film gave the film a perfect five-star rating, saying, "like spielberg, abrams has an eye for awe, his deft orchestration of indelible images  a tank trundling through a children's playground, a plot-pivotal landmark framed in the distance through a small hole in a bedroom wall  marking him as a born storyteller". christopher orr of the atlantic called it a "love letter to a cinematic era", while claudia puig of usa today praised it as "a summer blockbuster firing on all cylinders".
critics and audiences alike were polarized on the film's ending. some found it to be emotional, powerful, and satisfying while others found it rushed and forced. for example, writing for mubi's notebook, fernando f. croce alleged that "no film this year opens more promisingly and ends more dismally than j.j. abrams' super 8." other critics commented negatively on the film's frequent homages to early works of spielberg, particularly in its depiction of broken families (a theme spielberg has explored in nearly all of his films). for example, cnn's tom charity felt that "abrams' imitation [was] a shade too reverent for [his] taste." david edelstein, of new york magazine, called it a "flagrant crib," adding that "abrams has probably been fighting not to reproduce spielberg's signature moves since the day he picked up a camera. now, with the blessing of the master, he can plagiarize with alacrity."


=== accolades ===
in addition to these awards, the film was short-listed for the academy award for best visual effects and best original score, and the bafta award for best original screenplay, best sound, and best special visual effects. paramount submitted it for several considerations for the baftas including best film, best director (j. j. abrams), best original screenplay, leading actor (kyle chandler), supporting actress (elle fanning), supporting actor (joel courtney, gabriel basso, noah emmerich), cinematography, production design, editing, costume design, original music, sound, makeup and hair, and special visual effects.


== references ==


== external links ==
super 8 at imdb
super 8 at allmovie
super 8 at box office mojo
super 8 on letterboxd.com