supreme is a 2016 indian telugu-language action comedy film produced by dil raju under his banner sri venkateswara creations and directed by anil ravipudi. it stars sai dharam tej, raashi khanna  and music composed by sai karthik. the film received positive reviews from critics, praising sai dharma tej's performance whilst also becoming a tremendous success at the box office.
production began on 23 september 2015 in hyderabad and principal photography commenced on 5 october 2015. the film released on 5 may 2016.


== plot ==
jagruthi foundation was founded by a royal dynasty in ananthapur, having thousands of acres of land, maintaining so many schools, colleges, hospitals, orphanages, old age homes, and many other social service activities, which was taken care by its trustee narayana rao (sai kumar). vikram sarkar, a powerful mafia don, wants to grab the entire foundation, showing a loophole that it does not have original documents. narayana rao files a case in the court that he will produce the documents along with the original heir within a month's time. narayana rao and sarkar both are in search of an original heir. sarkar appoints a professional goon named beeku to kill them. finally, they find them in the united kingdom. raja rao (shiju) the third generation of the royal dynasty, has the documents. he is ready to give back documents to trust people but unfortunately, he dies in a road accident and the documents are missing.
meanwhile, balu (sai dharam tej) is an aggressive taxi driver at hyderabad who gets irritated if someone sounds the horn to his cab and makes their life miserable, he falls in love with an incompetent local sub-inspector bellam sridevi (rashi khanna), once he finds an anglo-indian orphan kid (mikhail gandhi) in his car trunk, he names him as rajan and takes care of him along with his father (rajendra prasad). the three of them gets emotionally attached to each other and becomes one family. the twist in the tale arises when the young boy is suddenly kidnapped by beeku and taken to odisha. balu and his father come to know from narayana rao that rajan is none other than the son of raja rao, the last heir of the foundation holding the original documents, and his parents are brutally killed by sarkar.
balu's father accompanies narayana rao to help them with the case, while balu sets out to bring rajan back. two musicians also accompany him in the name of giving lift. sridevi was kidnapped by balu and through her, he gets the location. rajan refuses to give documents, and beeku calls doctors. balu, sridevi, and the musicians dress up as doctors and escape with rajan. balu and sridevi cheer him up when his mood is off thinking of his parents. sridevi soon starts liking him and reciprocates him. all four are caught by beeku, but the man whose daughter was saved by balu and rajan fights the goons. balu also fights with them and sends rajan with sridevi to the court. however, sarkar blackmails rajan that balu will be killed, and rajan, to save balu lies in the court. balu somehow reaches court. rajan gives the documents and says that sarkar killed his parents. sarkar is arrested and attempts to shoot balu and rajan but in vain and is instead shot by sridevi, which is for the first time in her life, correct shooting. sridevi gets her gold medal which was her dream, and the film ends with balu and sridevi's wedding.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by sai karthik and raj-koti, with one song remixed from yamudiki mogudu. music was released on aditya music company. audio was launched on 14 april 2015, held at hyderabad. allu aravind, varun tej, nani, vamshi paidipally, harish shankar, and gopichand malineni attended as the other guests of the event.


== references ==


== external links ==
supreme at imdb