surviving picasso is a 1996 merchant ivory film directed by james ivory and starring anthony hopkins as the famous painter pablo picasso. it was produced by ismail merchant and david l. wolper. ruth prawer jhabvala's screenplay was loosely based on the biography picasso: creator and destroyer by arianna stassinopoulos huffington.


== plot ==
the young franoise meets picasso in nazi-occupied paris, where picasso is complaining that people broke into his house and stole his linen, rather than his paintings. it shows franoise being beaten by her father after telling him she wants to be a painter, rather than a lawyer. picasso is shown as often not caring about other people's feelings, firing his driver after a long period of service, and as a womanizer, saying that he can sleep with whomever he wants.
the film is seen through the eyes of his lover franoise gilot (natascha mcelhone). as the producers were unable to get permission to show the works of picasso in the film, the film is more about picasso's personal life rather than his works, and where it does show paintings, they are not his more famous works. when picasso is shown painting guernica, the camera sits high above the painting, with the work only slightly visible.
the film depicts several of the women who were important in picasso's life, such as olga khokhlova (played by jane lapotaire), dora maar (played by julianne moore), marie-thrse walter (played by susannah harker), and jacqueline roque (played by diane venora).


== cast ==
anthony hopkins as pablo picasso
natascha mcelhone as franoise gilot
julianne moore as dora maar
joss ackland as henri matisse
dennis boutsikaris as kootz
peter eyre as sabartes
peter gerety as marcel
susannah harker as marie-thrse walter
jane lapotaire as olga khokhlova
joseph maher as daniel-henry kahnweiler
bob peck as franoise's father
joan plowright as franoise's grandmother
diane venora as jacqueline roque
dominic west as paulo picasso
laura aikman as maya widmaier-picasso
nigel whitmey as pierre
leon lissek
andreas wisniewski
anthony milner
tom fisher
vernon dobtcheff as sergei diaghilev
hamish mccoll
sandor els, brigitte kahn, olegar fedoro as party guests
rose english
judith sharp


== production ==
the film was shot in paris and southern france.


== reception ==
the film received mixed reviews. on rotten tomatoes it has a rating of 32% based on reviews from 19 critics. on metacritic it has a score of 55 out of 100, based on reviews from 18 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".


== references ==


== external links ==
merchant ivory productions
surviving picasso at imdb
surviving picasso at rotten tomatoes
surviving picasso at box office mojo
john walker. (2009) "surviving picasso (1996) film review". artdesigncafe.