suryavamsam (transl. lineage of the sun god) is a 2020 indian tamil-language soap opera on zee tamil starring poornima bhagyaraj, nikitha rajesh and aashish chakravarthi in the lead roles. it premiered on 21 september 2020 and airs monday  to saturday. this is an official remake of zee telugu series america ammayi.


== plot ==
the story about annapoorani (annammal), who disowns her daughter kalyani and ostracizes her from the family for marrying against her consent. after 25 years, kalyani's daughter samantha tries to reunite her mother in the family.
over the years, kalyani falls ill and wishes to reunite with her family. so, samantha takes it upon herself to bring the family together. she enters her grandparents' house and before convincing them to accept their daughter, she falls in love with her maternal uncle's son, surya. one day, shanmugham steals the diamonds which came to exhibition to suryavamsam mall as per narayanan's idea to settle the loan that raji got from annammal. when annammal came to know that shanmugham stole, she lashes out at shanmugham but raji interferes and upsets annammal so she thought to leave the house and went to a ashram. narayanan took nirmala devi's phone number from jayanthi and called her and told her to come to india with samanya so they came to india. when samantha and surya got engaged, the real samanya came to the suryavamsam family and told jayanthi that samantha is a culprit who came with her name. jayanthi started to hate samantha and raji started liking her and thought of marrying samantha to her son, chandhru as samantha helped padmavathi in her marriage and made chandhru a responsible guy. samantha promised jayanthi that she will not meet surya or talk to him as jayanthi got ill. after few days, a bad intention man, abhishek who is nearby to suryavamsam house started acting like loving leelavathi. leelavathi also believed, samanya thought that she can use abhishek to separate the family.abhishek pinches samantha's hips and steals her credit card and purchases for leelavathi by it, the next day, abhishek enters suryavamsam house secretly to talk with leelavathi.


== cast ==


=== main ===
nikitha rajesh as samantha (sam)
a naughty, kind-hearted american woman, who tries to reunite her mother with the "suryavamsam" family. she entered under the name samanya in suryavamsam and everyone thought that she was jayanthi's friend's daughter, but she was chris and kalyani's daughter; annammal and selva ganapathy's grand daughter; padmavathi, chandru and leelavathi's cousin; surya's cousin and love interest.
aashish chakravarthi as surya
samantha calls him "black coffee". he is rude, but calm, kind hearted person and is jayanthi and shankaran's son; annammal and selva ganapathy's first grand son; leelavathi's elder brother; padmavathi and chandru's cousin brother; samantha's cousin and love interest.
poornima bhagyaraj as annapoorani (annammal)the present head of "suryavamsam" family, who takes all the decision in the family. she hates her own daughter kalyani, as she married a foreigner chris despite her wishes. she was the wife of selva ganapathy; mother of shanmugam, shankaran and kalyani; mother-in-law of raji and jayanthi; grandmother of surya, samantha, padmavathi, chandru and leelavathi.


=== recurring ===
nithya raj as samanya
the real samanya
kiruba as samanya's mother
jayanthi's friend
rajesh (actor) as selva ganapathy (dead)
suryavamsam's former head. he was annammal husband; shanmugam, shankaran and kalyani's father; raji and jayanthi's father-in-law; narayanan's elder brother; surya, samantha, padmavathi, chandru and leelavathi's grandfather.
sandhana as kalyani
a innocent lady, who marries a foreigner chris parker despite her family and settles in america. now she became ill and wants to reunite with her family. she was annammal and selva ganapathy's daughter; shanmugam and shankaran's younger sister; chris's wife and samantha's mother.
rafi ullah as chris parker
a foreigner, samantha's father;  kalyani's husband; annammal and selva ganapathy's son-in-law.
anitha venkat as raji
a traditional woman, annammal and selva ganapathy's daughter-in-law; shanmugam's wife; jayanthi's co-sister; samantha's aunt; padmavathi and chandru's mother. also she was annammal brother's daughter.
caroline hiltrud as jayanthi
a trendy woman, annammal and selva ganapathy's daughter-in-law; shankaran's wife; raji's co-sister, samantha's aunt; surya and leelavathi's mother.
birla bose (episode 182) / gokul (episode 83present) as shanmugam
annammal and selva ganapathy's first son; raji's husband; shankaran and kalyani's elder brother; samantha's uncle; padmavathi and chandru's father.
gajesh as shankaran
annammal and selva ganapathy's son; jayanthi's husband; shanmugam and kalyani's brother; samantha's uncle; surya and leelavathi's father.
sindhu sadhana as padmavathi (padma)
annammal and selva ganapathy's granddaughter; srinivasan's lover, then wife; raji and shanmugam's daughter; surya and padmavathi's cousin sister; samantha's cousin and chandru's elder sister.
madhan as chandru
annammal and selva ganapathy's grandson; raji and shanmugam's son; surya and leelavathi's cousin brother; samantha's cousin and padmavathi's younger brother.
dhachayani as leelavathi
annammal and selva ganapathy's granddaughter; jayanthi and shankaran's daughter; padmavathi and chandru's cousin sister; samantha's cousin and surya's younger sister.
ramachandran as narayanan
the antagonist, who is in favor of shanmugam, raji and chandru to possess them. he was selva ganapathy's younger brother; shanmugam, shankaran and kalyani's paternal uncle; surya, samantha, padmavathi, chandru and leelavathi's granduncle.
jayaraman mohan as srinivasan
a proposed bridegroom for padmavathi, who loves her at first sight. but his parents oppose the marriage alliance.
kavithalaya krishnan as krishna
srinivsan's father, who went to the suryavamsam house to look for padmavathi for his son srinivasan's bride. when he learns about the suryavamsam family's renunciation of kalyani, he refuses padmavathi and cancels the marriage proposal. but finally he accepts padma and srinivas marriage.


=== cameo ===
banu mathy as kasthuri
lavanya manickam as priya
paandi as sambandham
arunkumar padmanabha
manikandaraj major
"metti oli" shanthi
premalatha as prema
sangeetha balan as kamakshi


== production ==


=== launching ===
the production decided to launch this family melodrama series before march 2020. but due to covid-19 pandemic, the production and filming of television series were stalled. after the serial shootings were permitted in india, the series resumed and zee tamil decided to launch this series. the first promo was released on youtube by zee tamil on 2 september 2020.


=== casting ===
actress poornima bhagyaraj, was selected to play the head of family, with arundathi series fame nikitha rajesh selected for the female lead and a newcomer aashish chakravarthi, winner of mr. chennai international 2019 selected to play a male lead. while actor rajesh, ramachandran, anitha venkat, caroline and other plays supporting roles.


== crossover episodes ==
suryavamsam cast and crew joined maha sangamam with "neethane enthan ponvasantham" from 25 january to 26 february 2021.


== origin ==
this series was a remake of a telugu-language series america ammayi, which aired on zee telugu from 27 july 2015 to 21 july 2018.


== title ==
the title was taken from 1997 tamil feature movie suryavamsam. the meaning of the title is lineage of the sun god.


== international broadcast ==
the series was released on 21 september 2020 on zee tamil and zee tamil hd. the show was also broadcast internationally on the channel's international distribution.

it airs in sri lanka, singapore, the united states, europe, malaysia, mauritius, the middle east, africa, east asia, south africa, australasia and north america on zee tamil and zee tamil hd.
all episodes can be viewed with the app zee5.
it is also available via internet tv services lebara play and yupptv.


== references ==


== external links ==
suryavamsam at imdb
suryavamsam on zee5