suvarna sundari (transl. golden beauty) is a 1957 indian telugu-language swashbuckler film, produced by p. adinarayana rao under the anjali pictures banner and directed by vedantam raghavaiah. it stars akkineni nageswara rao, anjali devi  and music also composed by adinarayana rao.
the film was simultaneously shot in tamil as manaalane mangaiyin baakkiyam which was released first. lata mangeshkar suggested that 'suvarna sundari' be remade in hindi instead of dubbing the film. it was then made in hindi with the title same as the telugu version. akkineni nageswara rao, anjali devi did their roles in the hindi version as well; it was the only hindi movie in anr's film career, while gemini ganesan played the male lead role in the tamil version.
the shooting of the film was held at venus studios, madras and the outdoor shooting was held at shimsha falls, mysore. the film was released through chamria talkie distributors, headed by sundar lal nahata, and it set a record at the box office by celebrating 50 days in 48 centers and completed 100 days in 18 centers.


== plot ==
once upon a time, there was a kingdom malwa, it's prince jayanth (akkineni nageswara rao) is ready to leave, after accomplishing his education. just before, rajaguru's (k.v.s.sarma) daughter sarala (suryakala) denounces him for the refusal of the love as he underwent molested her. so, the king chandra bhanu penalizes the death penalty when jayanth absconds. on the way, he acquainted with 3 sly thieves kailasam (relangi), ullasam (ramana reddy) & chadastam (balakrishna) who confront jayanth to resolve the mystery behind a lord sivas temple. therein, jayanth relieves the curse of a gandharva who bestows him with 3 marvel gifts. a jug which supplies any amount of food, a mat which travels anywhere, and a wand which punishes a person irrespective of his strength. meanwhile, 3 crafty backstab jayanth, steals, shares 3 the objects and splits. before long fortuitously, a glorious angel surana sundari (anjali devi) land from heaven bounces him when they fall in love. at present, they couple up and sundari conceives. be cognizant to it, enraged indra curses sundari to take in the human form, dismiss her from jayanth's mind and also jayanth to mold as a statue if lays a finger on her. right now, jayanth quits, sundari falls on earth and gives birth to a baby boy but the wheel of fortune makes them cleft. years roll by, jayanth as a wanderer regains 3 objects ceasing the trickeries. in between, mishap turns him like a woman in the day, male in the night and it relieves only after showering with nectar. thereafter, he signs in a kingdom as jayanthi (rajasulochana) affiliates to princess parthima devi (girija). eventually, sundari in men's guise follows the same destiny and she is accredited as chief minister by the king (c.s.r). simultaneously, their son siva kumara (master babji) is raised by a cowherd (gummadi), after his death, he sets foot into siva temple where lord siva & goddess parvathi rears him. one night, parthima encounters jayanth and loves him, spotting it, grievous sundari renounces. later, jayanth comes across a demon through it, he detaches his curse when, unfortunately, he touches sundari. nevertheless, retrieving the past jayanth mutates into a statue. at that moment, siva kumara checks in them to the temple. thereupon, lord siva affirms the boy as their own and for extricating jayanth the boy should pick up golden lotus from heaven. after making an audacious journey, the boy secures his father. at last, they return, hitherto, jayanth is proved innocent. just as, parthima arrives with her father and the king handovers her to jayanth & sundari. finally, the movie ends a happy note.


== cast ==
akkineni nageswara rao as jayanth
anjali devi as suvarna sundari
ramana reddy as ullasam
relangi as kailasam
gummadi as tata
c.s.r as maharaju
balakrishna as chadastham
peketi sivaram as vasanthudu
k. v. s. sharma as rajaguru
rajasulochana as jayanthi
girija as parthima devi
suryakala as sarala
e. v. saroja as goddess parvati
master babji as siva kumarudu
kanchana as naaga kanyaa


== crew ==
art: vaali
choreography: vempati satyam
dialogues: malladi ramakrishna sastry
lyrics: samudrala sr, samudrala jr, kosaraju
playback: ghantasala, p. susheela, p. leela, jikki, pithapuram, m.s.rama rao, komala,
story: vempati sadasivabrahmam, p. adinarayana rao
editing: n. s. prakash
cinematography: m. a. rahman
music - producer: p. adinarayana rao
screenplay - director: vedantam raghavaiah
banner: anjali pictures
release date: 10 may 1957


== soundtrack ==
music composed by p. adinarayana rao. music released on hmv audio company. 


=== hindi version ===
"kuhu kuhu bole koyaliya" - mohammed rafi, lata mangeshkar
"mujhe na bula chhup chhup" - lata mangeshkar
"ram naam japna paraya maal apna" - mohammed rafi
"girija sang hai shish pe gang hai" - lata mangeshkar
"tarana (shastriya sangeet)" - lata mangeshkar, sudha malhotra
"hat hat hat jaa re natkhat piya" - lata mangeshkar, sudha malhotra
"lakshmim sheer samudra raj" - ghantasala
"chanda se pyare ankhiyo ke taare soja re maiya ke raaj dular" - manna dey, lata mangeshkar
"mausam suhana dil hainz" - lata mangeshkar
"sar pe matki ankhiya bhatki" - asha bhosle
"shambho sun lo meri pukar" - lata mangeshkar
"lelo ji lelo gudiya" - lata mangeshkar
"maa maa karta phire laadla" - mohammed rafi
"mai hu pari rasiya ras ki bhari" - lata mangeshkar


== references ==


== external links ==
suvarna sundari at imdb