swamy ra ra is a 2013 indian telugu-language crime comedy film directed by debutant sudheer varma and produced by chakri chirugupati under lakshmi narasimha entertainments. it stars nikhil siddharth and swathi reddy while pooja ramachandran and ravi babu play supporting roles.released on 23 march 2013, the film is a box office success. the film was remade in kannada as jamboo savari (2014).


== plot ==
a gold vinayaka idol worth nearly 100 million is stolen by its residing temple pujari (vishvesh) of the sree padmanabha swamy temple with the help of a security guard. the idol, which actually belongs to the newly found treasure of the mandir is sold to a mysterious person who dies after his car meets with an accident. a kid takes the murti from the ground and presents it to his friend who in turn presents it to her daughter-in-law. that man sells this idol to a goldsmith at alappuzha of kerala for 6,000. that goldsmith sells it to another rich man at mangalore of karnataka for 37,000. he, in turn, sells it to another rich man at shimoga of karnataka for 190,000. this idol is sold to another rich man at bellary of karnataka for 0.5 million. th idol is sold to a millionaire at thiruchanur of tamil nadu for 2 million which in turn is sold at madurai for 6 million which reaches to a trader at hyderabad for a value of 11 million.
the story then shifts to four lives surya (nikhil siddharth), bhanu (pooja ramachandran), ravi (satya) and swati (swati reddy). while surya, bhanu, ravi are pickpocketers who rob people together, swati is a journalist whose parents left for the united states for a short duration. swati buys a yellow color vespa vehicle which is stolen by surya while being chased by a person as surya and ravi rob him. after giving a complaint to the police, swati finds surya riding her vehicle. surya, after being stopped by swati, represents himself as a software engineer working at hp who bought this vehicle from a third party. surya and swati become friends and surya later introduces bhanu and ravi to swati as his colleagues in hp. meanwhile, giri (ravi varma) goes to buy the idol from the trader on behalf of durga prasad (ravi babu),a gang mobster whose obligation is to deliver the idol to a minister in order to get exonerated from all his cases and joining politics. giri kills the trader, takes the idol and goes to durga's house and gives him the money he sent for and tells that the trader was dead and the idol is missing.
later durga gives the same money bag to his personal lawyer and finds blood stains on the bag. he sends his henchmen to trace giri and get the idol from him. however, giri keeps the idol in the hand bag of swati when he hits surya and swati when they were riding their vespa vehicle and notes the vehicle number. at swati's home, chotu, a kid who is a friend of surya, steals the idol from her handbag and gives it to surya. surya along with bhanu and ravi approaches shankar via jogi (praveen), who is entitled to a commission of 10% of the sale price. shankar decides to sell it for 50 million but ravi foolishly reveals in a hurry that they are lucky to get 0.5 million. they go to swati's house that night and celebrate terming salary hike as the reason. next morning durga goes to swati's home, searches her handbag, kills giri in front of them and demands them to tell the whereabouts of the idol. during the journey to shankar's house, two professional killers (jogi krishnam raju and jogi naidu) threaten them to vacate the car as they are in a hurry to escape from the police. at this point, the trio and swati flee to swati's friend dolly's house.
shankar sells the idol to two nigerian thugs (alex and elves) who approached shankar via jogi. there one of the nigerian thugs gets tempted after he sees vijji (shravanthi), a close person of shankar. jogi is insulted by shankar by denying to give his commission after the nigerian gang left away. jogi is humiliated by this and calls the trio to meet him the next hour. there jogi asks surya to get shankar's purse before he reaches the place of consignment where the price would be transferred by showing a 10 dollars note given by the nigerian thug duo. if the note is brought, it would be shared among the trio and jogi in equal ratio. the trio successfully gets his purse without his knowledge and tear the note into two equal halves, one with surya and one with jogi. surya then comes to know that swati is kidnapped by durga and he requires the idol in an hour in order to set swati free. thus surya calls shankar and comes to know by him that the idol is in novotel after he gave his half note. jogi then calls shankar to bring 50 million if he needs the other half to novotel. meanwhile, vijji succeeds in seducing the nigerian thug, allowing her to tie his hands with a tight shirt and gets the locker code and flees with the idol. surya after trashing the other in the same way comes to know about the locker code, goes to the room only to find an empty locker and being chased by the armed nigerian thugs.
at the cellar of novotel, shankar gets his half note and shows the 50 million cash in a bag. in no time the trio, ignorant of the presence of the bag in the car, get into it along with vijji and go away. shankar chases them in his car, jogi chases them in his friend's car, the nigerian thugs chase them in a car they hijacked. bhanu snatches the idol from vijji and leaves her away on the road. surya is summoned by durga to dog house to give the idol and take swati away. the cars of surya, shankar, jogi, the nigerian thugs, the minister reach there and all of them enter the dog house. the professional killers, who robbed durga's car in the past are employed by the minister to kill durga, reach there and wait outside for the right time. here a mexican standoff ensues, with shankar aiming at surya who in turn is aimed by jogi with a gun. jogi is aimed at by the nigerian thugs who are in turn aimed by durga. durga is aimed by a gangster who in turn is aimed at by durga's henchman. the minister who enters at this point is aimed by shankar with his second gun, forming a nearly completed circle.
the killers entered the room and in chaos, everyone is killed except the trio, swati, durga and one of the nigerian thugs. the nigerian thugs and durga shoot each other fatally and the trio along with swati flee away with the idol. in the journey to home, swati declares her love for surya to her mother in his presence. meanwhile, the tire gets punctured and the trio gets down to check the tire. but in the car's decklid, they find the bag containing 50 million. the trio jump in joy while swati is ignorant of this and remains normal. the idol is sent back to anantha padmanabha swamy temple and the film ends with surya trying to secure a job in hp before swati's parents return.


== cast ==
nikhil siddharth as surya
swati reddy as swati
ravi babu as durga prasad
pooja ramachandran as bhanu
jeeva as shankar
ravi varma as giri
praveen as jogi
satya as ravi
bhanu
jogi krishnam raju
jogi naidu
master sathwik as chotu
murali krishna
nara rohit (narrator)


== production ==
this is the second film from lakshmi narasimha entertainments.


=== casting ===
nikhil plays the role of a pick-pocketer in this film. nikhil mentioned in his twitter that he is excited to work with actor ravi babu, who is playing a crucial role in the film.


=== filming ===
the film started its regular shooting on 16 july 2012 at attapur in hyderabad. the 1st schedule of the film was completed on 7 august 2012 in the surroundings of hyderabad. the 2nd schedule started on 22 august and was completed on 7 september 2012. a schedule was started in the surroundings of hyderabad on 23 september 2012 it was continued to 6 october 2012. a 20-day schedule started on 14 october 2012. some key scenes and songs were shot in kerala and tamil nadu.


== soundtrack ==


=== launch ===
the audio was launched on 23 january 2013 at taj deccan in hyderabad. it was attended by nani, srinivas avasarala, allari naresh, manoj manchu, nara rohit, sunil, regina, nandini reddy, mohan krishna indraganti and bvsn prasad.


=== track list ===
the film's music was composed by sunny m.r. musicperk.com rated the album 8/10, quoting "a fresh waft of cool music! experimental magic with simplicity".
all lyrics are written by krishna chaitanya.


== distribution ==
cinema5, a subsidiary of tv5 news is bringing swamy ra ra to us cinema halls.


== release ==
the film was given 'u/a' certificate. it was released on 23 march 2013.


=== reception ===
the film received positive reviews from critics. times of ap gave a review stating 3/5 and stated that nikhil siddharth has good timing for comedy dialogues and improve his expressions. swathi has created an impact on the audience with her energy and cute expressions. jeevi of idlebrain.com rated the film 3.25/5 stated that swamy ra ra is a class crime comedy. and you can watch it. oneindia.com rated the film 3/5 stating that nikhil's action is one of the biggest plus point's for the film. indiaglitz gave a review stating swamy ra ra is a rehash of already-seen loot-and-scoot films with nothing unpredictable in store. sify.com gave a review of rating 3/5 stating swamy ra ra has many positives to talk about: stylized narration, some interesting sequences and the superb music. karthik pasupulate of the times of india gave rating 3.5/5 and stated it all you feel like you seen some cinema and not some mish mashed formula package. the hindu stated that "the film will pick-pocket your brain and you'll most probably end up feeling richer, if not a millionaire."


== legacy ==
after the success of the film, nikhil siddharth and swathi reddy starred in karthikeya (2014).


== references ==


== external links ==
swamy ra ra at imdb