swarnakamalam (transl.the golden lotus) is a 1988 indian telugu-language language dance film written and directed by k. viswanath. the film stars venkatesh and bhanupriya  while sharon lowen appears in a special role. the choreography is helmed by kelucharan mohapatra, with a soundtrack by ilaiyaraaja. the song sequences were extensively shot at the valley of flowers national park, the nanda devi national park, the shanti stupa and bhringesvara siva temple at dhauli; other locations in visakhapatnam.the film was screened at the indian panorama section of the 12th international film festival of india, the asia pacific film festival and the ann arbor film festival. the film received three indian express awards, three state nandi awards, and two south filmfare awards, including nandi award for best feature film and filmfare best film award (telugu).


== plot ==

meenakshi (bhanupriya) and savitri (devilalita) are daughters of a kuchipudi doyen,  vedantam seshendra sharma. while a highly accomplished artist in his field, seshendra sharma is not well-off and has not been able to afford for his daughters, a conventional education. both of them have achieved a respectable degree of proficiency  savitri in carnatic classical music and meenakshi in classical dance.
savitri, the elder daughter, is grateful for her knowledge and interest and looks forward to a life that will require her to hone her skills in the art. meenakshi, on the other hand, is bitter about the lack of opportunity that she feels in the field of classical dance in india and resolves to make a simpler and more pleasurable life for herself as soon as possible, while confiding her ambitions only to her sister.
chandrasekhar (venkatesh) is a tenant who has just moved in next door. he is a painter and is shown to be handling movie promotions as a large part of his work. he develops an interest in the neighbors and tries to help them in whatever way he can, partly because of his (unconfessed) interest in meenakshi and partly because of his interest in the art which seems to be slowly fading from public life.
the rest of the film is largely built around meenakshi's journey from skepticism to devotion in her pursuit of dance. chandrasekhar is shown to be an important catalyst in this transformation. meenakshi becomes an accomplished dancer through the direction of renowned odissi dancer sharon lowen, and gets the opportunity to go to the united states and perform. she learns of chandrasekhar's love for her, and finally unites with chandrasekhar, confessing her love for him as well.


== cast ==
venkatesh as chandu / chandra shekar
bhanupriya as meenakshi
shanmukha srinivas as srinivas
sakshi ranga rao as omkaram
sri lakshmi (actress) as akhilam
s. k. misro as government official
devilalita as savitri
dubbing janaki
pavala syamala
sharon lowen as herself
aruna macherla as meenakshi's friend
k. v. satyanarayana
vinnakota vijayaram
n. sivarama krishnaiah
k. s. t. sai
s. s. vajpayee


== production ==
the production design was helmed by arun d. ghodgaonkar, with cinematography by lok singh. casting was done by k. viswanath, including american dancer sharon lowen, who portrayed herself as a veteran odissi artist.


== soundtrack ==
the music for the film was composed by ilaiyaraaja and released on echo music company.


== awards ==
nandi awards - 1988best feature film - (gold) - ch.v. appa rao
best actress - bhanupriya
special jury award - venkateshfilmfare awards south - 1988best film  telugu - ch.v. appa rao
best actress  telugu - bhanupriyacinema express awards - 1988cinema express awards best film - ch.v. appa rao 
cinema express awards best director - k. viswanath
cinema express awards best actress - bhanupriya


== references ==


== external links ==
swarnakamalam at imdb