sweethearts is a 1938 american technicolor musical romance film directed by w.s. van dyke and starring jeanette macdonald and nelson eddy. the screenplay, by dorothy parker and alan campbell, uses the play within a play device: a contemporary broadway production of  the 1913 victor herbert operetta is the setting for another pair of sweethearts, the stars of the show. it was the first color film for nelson or jeanette (as well as mgm's first three strip technicolor feature).  it was their first film together without uniforms or period costumes.


== plot ==

broadway stars gwen marlowe (jeanette macdonald) and ernest lane (nelson eddy) are appearing in a 6-year run of  victor herbert's operetta sweethearts (ray bolger dances the role of  hans). they are also very much in love after six years of marriage. norman trumpett (reginald gardiner) is a successful hollywood talent scout under pressure to recruit marlowe and lane for his studio, which their broadway producer felix lehman (frank morgan) is equally determined to prevent.
the couple's attempts to rest and be together are repeatedly thwarted by professional and personal demands made on their time, talents and money by lehman and their own theatrical families - who also live with them. frustrated beyond endurance and seduced by trumpett's idyllic (and false) description of working conditions in hollywood, they decide to quit the show and take the hollywood offer. (in guise of buying a new wardrobe for the trip jeanette macdonald models fashions of 1938.)
this spells the end for the broadway production, news so devastating that constantly feuding playwright leo kronk (mischa auer) and composer oscar engel (herman bing) stop fighting long enough for lehman, kronk and company to hatch a counter-plot. by convincing marlowe that lane is having an affair with his pretty secretary kay jordan (florence rice) they split-up the happy couple, putting an end to the hollywood deal and allowing lehman to mount two separate touring companies of the show, each with one star and one understudy.
delighted with the outcome, engel produces kronk's new play - which closes in a week. from a variety review of the play marlowe and lane realize they were tricked and join forces to confront lehman.... but nonetheless resume the broadway run of sweethearts together.


== cast ==
jeanette macdonald as gwen marlowe
nelson eddy as ernest lane
frank morgan as felix lehman
ray bolger as hans
florence rice as kay jordan
mischa auer as leo kronk
herman bing as oscar engel
george barbier as benjamin silver
reginald gardiner as norman trumpett
fay holden as hannah
allyn joslyn as dink
lucile watson as mrs. marlowe
gene lockhart as augustus
kathleen lockhart as aunt amelia
roger converse as usher
douglas mcphail as harvey horton
betty jaynes as una wilson


== awards ==
the film was nominated for two academy awards: best sound recording (douglas shearer) and best music, scoring (herbert stothart). the film was mgm's first feature-length color film, and it received an honorary academy award for  its colour cinematography.


== references ==


== external links ==
sweethearts at imdb
sweethearts at allmovie
sweethearts at the tcm movie database
sweethearts at the american film institute catalog