synanon is a 1965 american drama film directed by richard quine and starring chuck connors, stella stevens, alex cord, richard conte, eartha kitt and edmond o'brien. it featured a screenplay by ian bernard, and was filmed at synanon in santa monica, california.


== plot ==
hooked on heroin, zankie albo is admitted to synanon house, a rehabilitation center. chuck dederich, a recovering alcoholic, is in charge.
zankie is placed in the care of joaney during his early, painful stages of drug withdrawal. she, too, is a rehabbing junkie, and any further mistake on her part could permanently cost her custody of her child.
an attraction develops between zankie and joaney, resulting in jealousy from another man interested in her, ben, a parolee and "graduate" of the center. ben reports them to the center's officials after catching zankie and joaney in a romantic tryst. a patient who manages to get high on cough medicine is persuaded by zankie to share it, leading to a tragic end.
zankie while in a seedy motel room with joaney shoots up heroin, which unbeknownst to him is bad.  as he experiences a reaction to the drug, joaney watches in horror; seconds later zankie is dead from the overdose.


== cast ==
chuck connors as ben
stella stevens as joaney adamic
alex cord as zankie albo
richard conte as reid kimble
eartha kitt as betty kimble
edmond o'brien as chuck dederich
barbara luna as mary (as barbara luna)
alejandro rey as chris
richard evans as hopper
gregory morton as vince
chanin hale as arline
k.c. townsend as pruddy (as carsey townsend)
larry kert as bob adamic
bernie hamilton as pete
solomom sturges as joe mann (as mark sturges)
lawrence montaigne as the greek
patricia huston as carla
arnold ross as pianist - resident at synanon house
john peterson as pianist - resident at synanon house
james middleton as pianist - resident at synanon house
anthony daddio as pianist - resident at synanon house
candy latson as pianist - resident ar synanon house
dan spaccarelli as pianist - resident at synanon house
herb rosen as pianist - resident at synanon house
william crawford as pianist - resident at synanon house
charles haden as pianist - resident at synanon house
matthew notkins as pianist - resident at synanon house
peter bernard as timmy- joanies son


== reception ==
a. h. weiler of the new york times was positive: "richard quine, who produced and directed this new arrival ... has glaringly spotlighted residents of this west coast haven for the dope and alcohol enslaved, with results that are arresting and informative. ... mr. quine and his troupe achieved authenticity and a documentary quality simply by filming their story at the actual synanon house on the beach at santa monica, calif."


== references ==


== external links ==
synanon at imdb