taarzan: the wonder car is a 2004 indian fantasy action thriller film directed by abbas burmawalla and mustan burmawalla. the film stars vatsal sheth and ayesha takia in the lead roles, while farida jalal, pankaj dheer, sadashiv amrapurkar, amrish puri,  shakti kapoor, gulshan grover and mukesh tiwari play supporting roles. upon release, the film was a box office disaster. however over the years, it has become a cult classic. it is loosely based on the american film christine (1983),ayesha takia won the filmfare best debut award for her part in the movie.


== plot ==
in 1992 , deven chaudhary (ajay devgn) lives with his mother suhasini (farida jalal) and 10 year-old only sons raj. deven spends considerable time designing the perfect car, calling it dc  which is very futuristic and more advanced than any other car in the market  and registering its patent. the suv car is said to have 400bhp and 500nm of torque, as well as making it from 0-60 in 5.2 seconds. he also looks after an older morris minor mm, handed over to him by his late father, and calls it "taarzan", which is based on the cars mirror ornament of the disney character tarzan. he meets with rakesh kapoor (pankaj dheer) and his partners, who praise his design but decline dealing with him, as they do not want to give royalty as part of the deal.
later, deven finds that kapoor and his partners conned him and registered his design under their name. deven reports this to a police officer, inspector sanjay sharma (deepak shirke), but the latter turns out to be on kapoor's payroll. kapoor, along with his cronies and sharma, attack and lock deven in his car. the car is then pushed into the river, causing a bound and gagged deven to die. unaware of the truth behind deven's death, his mother decides to bring up her grandson alone.
12 years later, in 2004, raj chaudary  (vatsal sheth) is now a 22 year-old boy, living with suhasini, and studies at a college where he falls in love with a rich girl named priya rakesh kapoor  (ayesha takia). the young raj now works in the garage of kartar singh (paji) (amrish puri) as a mechanic. one day, raj discovers taarzan and recognizes it immediately. he somehow pools money and buys it at a throwaway price, which was 5000 rupees. raj wants to update the car that reminds him of his father, deven. little does he know that with the car, he has also brought back his father, whose soul is trapped inside the car.
kartar is moved on learning this and aides raj in repairing taarzan. taarzan is totally revamped into a car even more advanced than deven's design, and raj decides to rename it dc (as raj's father's name deven chaudhary), to honour deven's memory. here, deven's spirit possesses taarzan and starts killing all those who were responsible for the murder: he kills kailash chopra when the latter is on his way to palghar, he then kills mahesh saxena during new year's eve, he kills officer sanjay sharma, in the latter's garage, and finally, he kills anthony d' costa when d' costa decides to stay away from the car, by going to nagpur. since the car now belongs to raj, he becomes a suspect in the eyes of inspector khurana (gulshan grover), the investigating officer. here, kapoor returns to india after learning that all his partners have died. kapoor is revealed to be priya's father.
on priya's insistence, kapoor goes to meet raj, but after learning that raj is deven's son, kapoor assumes that raj has somehow found the truth and is using priya as a pawn. kapoor decides to kill raj and take priya back with him. priya and raj are both clueless, but raj is shocked when kapoor tells him the truth. here, taarzan comes alive again and, in front of the disbelieving eyes of kapoor and raj, jumps into the ocean to save raj. deven's spirit now becomes visible to everybody.
in front of raj, suhasini, priya, and inspector khurana, a terrified kapoor confesses the crime. khurana arrests kapoor, while deven says his last goodbye to suhasini and raj. with raj, suhasini, and priya united, deven's spirit becomes free, and he ascends to heaven, with raj and priya living a happy life afterwards. later raj marries priya.


== cast ==
ajay devgn as deven choudhary, rajs father
vatsal sheth as raj choudhary, deven's son, priya's boyfriend
ayesha takia as priya rakesh kapoor, raj's girlfriend
amrish puri as kartar "kaakha" singh (paji), raj's boss
farida jalal as mrs. suhasini choudhary, deven's mother and raj's grandmother
pankaj dheer as rakesh kapoor, deven's enemy and priya's father
sadashiv amrapurkar as anthony d'costa, rakesh's ex-business partner
shakti kapoor as mahesh saxena, rakesh's ex-business partner
mukesh tiwari as kailash chopra, rakesh's ex-business partner
sheela david as mrs chopra, kailash chopra's  wife
gulshan grover as inspector khurana
rajpal yadav as constable havaldar sitaram
deepak shirke as inspector sanjay sharma, a police officer who was in the payroll of rakesh and his business partners
sumeet pathak as vikram vicky jain, raj's best friend
jeetu verma as jojo d'costa, anthony's son
sikandar kharbanda as rocky, raj's enemy-turned-friend
narendra bedi as truck driver
amrit patel as scrapeyard junk owner
sharad sankla as constable mohan shinde


== soundtrack ==
the music is composed by himesh reshammiya with lyrics by sameer.


== references ==


== external links ==
taarzan: the wonder car at imdb