take this waltz is a 2011 romantic comedy-drama film written, produced, and directed by sarah polley. the film centres on margot, a 28-year-old freelance writer who lives in a charming house on a leafy street in toronto's little portugal neighbourhood, as she struggles with and examines her feelings for lou, her husband of five years, while exploring a new relationship with daniel, an artist and rickshaw driver who lives across the street.
the film stars michelle williams, seth rogen, luke kirby, and sarah silverman.


== plot ==
margot, a freelance writer, meets daniel, an artist and rickshaw operator, while on a business trip, and although they immediately share some chemistry, she reveals to him that she is married. however, it turns out that daniel is living across the street from margot and her husband lou in toronto. although lou and margot appear happy together, it becomes clear that margot is not completely satisfied with her marriage, possibly aggravated by encountering daniel. as the film progresses margot and daniel interact more and more until she ultimately leaves her husband to be with him. lou is saddened, yet understanding. the audience is then shown a montage of margot's new life with daniel, including several brief sex scenes, however these in turn are soon replaced with scenes of mundane activities. it becomes clear that the excitement is also leaving margot's relationship with daniel. geraldine, lou's sister and a recovering alcoholic, confronts margot (while drunk) and tells her that she should have just accepted that life has gaps and that changing relationships was not the answer.


== cast ==
michelle williams as margot
seth rogen as lou rubin
luke kirby as daniel
sarah silverman as geraldine
jennifer podemski as karen
graham abbey as james
aaron abrams as aaron


== production ==
pre-production, filming and post-production took place in 2010/2011 at locations in and around toronto ontario including at pinewood toronto studios, pearson international airport, the royal cinema and in louisbourg, nova scotia.a communal shower scene featuring actresses michelle williams, jennifer podemski and sarah silverman gained press attention, as it was silverman's first time appearing fully nude on screen. during press interviews, silverman stated that she was comfortable performing in the scene, because it was a non-sexual portrayal of a common, everyday occurrence of women being nude together.


== release ==
take this waltz had its world premiere at the toronto international film festival on september 11, 2011. the film then played at the 31st annual atlantic film festival and the 59th annual san sebastin international film festival. at the end of september, take this waltz was shown at the 25th edmonton international film festival and the vancouver international film festivals. the film closed the calgary international film festival and the cinfest sudbury international film festival. in april 2012, take this waltz was shown at the tribeca film festival. a month later it played at the seattle international film festival.on october 17, 2011, it was announced that magnolia pictures had acquired the us rights to take this waltz. they released the film through their ultra vod program on may 25, 2012, before releasing it to theatres on june 29, 2012. the film also opened to canadian theatres on june 29. take this waltz was released on june 14, 2012, in australia. in the united kingdom, it was released by studiocanal on august 17, 2012.


=== home media ===
take this waltz was released on dvd and blu-ray on october 23, 2012. it was released on netflix in june 2017.


== reception ==


=== box office ===
take this waltz earned $203,127 upon its opening weekend in canada. the film opened to 27 theatres and landed at number one in the box office top five. in the us, take this waltz earned $137,019 during its opening weekend across 30 theatres. the film has grossed $1,239,692 in the us.


=== critical response ===
the film has received generally positive reviews from critics. film review aggregation site rotten tomatoes classified the film as "fresh" with a 77% approval rating among 119 critics, with a rating average of 7 out of 10. metacritic, which assigns a score of 1100 to individual film reviews, gave take this waltz an average rating of 68 based on 34 reviews. joshua rothkopf from  time out new york chose take this waltz as one of the publications "top ten tribeca film festival 2012 picks". rothkopf stated "her equally ambitious latest marks polley as a serious explorer of broken relationships. michelle williams and seth rogen (more exposed than he's ever allowed himself to be) are married torontonians who have settled into a too-comfortable domesticity. the simmering friction, caused in part by charming neighbour luke kirby, takes the film in surprising directions." stephen holden of the new york times commented "the temptations and perils of 'the grass is always greener' syndrome aren't as gripping a subject as alzheimer's, the topic of ms. polley's first film, away from her, but the movie radiates a melancholy glow."stella papamichael, writing for digital spy, gave the film three out of five stars. she praised polley's approach to the film calling it "different, fresh and exciting", but not as "well-balanced" as away from her. papamichael added "margot is an emotionally gritty role for williams and she plays it brilliantly close to the edge, but she can seem at odds with a scenario that has more in common with a mills & boon fantasy than the real world." the guardian's john patterson proclaimed "take this waltz's practical wisdom about entropy in relationships and sense of resigned acceptance are leavened by an uncharacteristically active and talkative  and often very witty  performance from williams." justin chang from variety said "given how quickly movie characters tend to fall into bed with one another, it's especially rewarding to see writer-director sarah polley wring maximum tension, humor and emotional complexity from a young wife's crisis of conscience in take this waltz. despite a few tonal and structural missteps, this intelligent, perceptive drama proves as intimately and gratifyingly femme-focused as polley's 2006 debut, away from her." chang believed the film was "flat-out sexy enough" to appeal to audiences of either gender and praised williams and rogen's performances.cbc news' film reviewer, eli glasner, gave take this waltz three out of five and stated, "although the film loses its footing near the end, adventurous movie fans should enjoy taking polley's passion project for a spin." the daily telegraph's robbie collin commented "polley's ideas and images are never subtle (see: pulsating fairground sequences, a wheeling time-lapse shot backed by the titular leonard cohen dirge), but that's part of the charm. her film is flush with beauty and truth, and is unerringly, unnervingly accurate on love, desire and friendship." empire's david hughes awarded the film four out of five stars and said "sarah polley's second film is a masterfully painted portrait of an ordinary marriage under threat, dominated by a central performance of exquisite subtlety and observation." in december 2012, andrew o'hehir from salon revealed that williams was his first choice for best actress at the new york film critics circle awards.


=== accolades ===


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
take this waltz at imdb
take this waltz at box office mojo
take this waltz at metacritic
take this waltz at rotten tomatoes