takkari donga  is a 2002 indian telugu-language western action comedy film directed by jayant paranjee. mahesh babu, lisa ray and bipasha basu play the lead roles. mahesh got nandi special jury award for these film.the film was recorded as average at the box office. the film was dubbed into hindi as choron ka chor by goldmines telefilms in 2014 and into tamil as vetri veeran. and it was dubbed in bhojpuri as choron ka raja.


== plot ==
the film starts with shakeel (rahul dev) killing his own brother for information, who is also known to veeru dada (kolla ashok kumar). in the encounter, veeru jumps off into a river from a cliff. after 18 years, we have veeru with a leg cut off giving info to raja (mahesh babu), a mischievous thief who robs banks in style. raja gives veeru a share of 50% for all his tip offs. raja becomes more daring as the price tag on his head increases by thousands.  there is another mischievous thief, panasa (bipasha basu). she and her uncle follow raja so she can dupe him and escape with all the looted money. as the things go on a frolicking way between panasa and raja, shakeel is searching for veeru. veeru realizes shakeel will kill him soon. hence, veeru offers a big diamond to raja and asks him to take his daughter bhuvana (lisa ray) to his brother dharma's place.
on their journey, raja sees a house which emotionally disturbs him. when bhuvana asks about it he reveals that it is his childhood house and his father and sister were killed by an unknown masked person and he became a thief in the journey of finding him. when bhuvana asks how will he identify the killer, he tells her there is a scar on killer's hand by which he can identify him.
later, when they go to dharma's place, dharma is killed. raja goes to a nearby shop to arrange a funeral for dharma. but it is shakeel who is disguised as the shop owner. when shakeel arrives he sees a map in bhuvana's hand. he forcibly tries take it and in excitement he said that for that map he killed his brother, bhuvana's father, dharma and that map is the way to hidden diamonds. meanwhile, a fight takes place in which the map was burned.
then shakeel ties raja to a tree and forcibly takes bhuvana as only she knows the route to that hidden diamond treasury.
meanwhile, raja releases himself and went to shakeel. a fight takes place. later, shakeel reveales he knows who killed raja's father and he will give details about him only when raja helps him to find the path to the hidden treasure. raja agrees.
with the help of raja, shakeel finds the path to the hidden treasure. while shakeel is taking the diamonds, raja notices the scar on shakeel's hand by which he realizes it is shakeel who killed his father and sister.
at the climax, raja kills shakeel.


== cast ==
mahesh babu as raja
lisa ray as  bhuvana
bipasha basu as panasa
kolla ashok kumar as veeru dada
rahul dev as shakeel
tanikella bharani as doobey (panasa's uncle)
rajasimha as bartender
ravi chalapati
krishna (special appearance)


== production ==
90% of the film's shoot was done in colorado.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by mani sharma and the lyrics were written by bhuvana chandra, vennelakanti, chandra bose and kula sekhar.

theme - instrumental
"nalugurikee" - shankar mahadevan
"aleba aleba" - k. k, kalpana
"hey mama" - tippu, kalpana
"bagundammo" - spb charan, singer usha
"chukkallu chandhrudee" - s. p. balasubramaniam, prasanna


== references ==


== external links ==
takkari donga at imdb