talaash: the hunt begins... is a 2003 indian  hindi action thriller film starring akshay kumar and kareena kapoor in title roles. it is directed by suneel darshan and produced by pahlaj nihalani.


== plot ==
babu (suresh oberoi) works for a gang that specializes in drug trafficking, arms smuggling, prostitution and many other illegal activities. the boss of this gang is an evil gangster named chhote pathan (kabir bedi) with his loyal men rajjo singh (raj babbar) and d.k sharma (dalip tahil). he also keeps many secrets of this gang, he was caught previously and he is promised by chhote pathan that if he keeps his mouth shut they will look after his family however they betrayed him. he is bailed out by an honest police inspector (ashish vidyarthi) who lectures him that a criminal does indeed commit a crime however his family bears the consequences. babu returns home to find that his wife poornima (raakhee), arjun (his son) and pooja is (his daughter) live a destitute life due to the betrayal of chhote pathan and his gang. he tells poornima that they betrayed him for his silence and punished them so now he will take revenge and punish them for it. he then teams up with the inspector and reveals the secrets of where their dealings happen where many gang members are arrested, however, chhote pathan and his sidekicks rajjo singh and d.k sharma find babu hiding and threaten to punish him. they forcibly take him to babu's home where they decide to punish him in front of poornima and her children. arjun is out doing his job to earn money and only poornima and pooja are present at home. poornima begs chhote pathan to forgive them and promises them they'll leave the city. chhote pathan taunts poornima that he won't kill them but he will punish them in a way that no one has seen or heard of, he grabs pooja and then tells poornima that he will take his daughter with them where they will raise her for 1012 years and then sell her. babu tries to save his daughter however chhote pathan kills him by beheading him. poornima stands there shocked whilst her husband babu is beheaded and his daughter is taken by chhote pathan. they leave in their car and pooja screams for help when she sees her brother returning home from work. he sees pooja in the back of the car yelling for help. he runs after the car however falls trying to keep up with the car. he runs back home to find his father dead and his mother crying on top of his dead body. babu's dead body is cremated and when he goes back home he finds his mother completely mental due to the incident. poornima considers pooja's toy doll her daughter and does not recognize arjun. arjun goes to the inspector who informs him that the police has searched every nook and corner of the city however they could not find chhote pathan, rajjo singh and sharma. he tells arjun that they have completely disappeared and may have fled the city. arjun promises that he will not give up and promises to search for sister.
10 years later
poornima having lost her mind, is hospitalized in a mental hospital. growing up, arjun (akshay kumar) becomes a high-profile vigilante. he works for the police inspector who is now the commissioner of police by exposing many gangsters of the city dealing in automatic weapons worth millions. he visits his mother poornima who is still insane and asks where pooja and arjun promises to find her no matter what. the commissioner of police (ashish vidyarthi) tells arjun that after years of his patience and hard work, he has for the first time found a clue that could possibly lead him to his sister pooja. he tells arjun the story of the past of how, 10 years ago, chhote pathan and his gang murdered his father, fled the city and reached the city of ghaziabad, where in police chase chhote pathan and rajjo singh got killed when their jeep turned upside down in the accident. he tells arjun after the deaths of chhote pathan and rajjo singh, it was d.k. sharma who took over the gang's responsibility but he then disappeared and no news of him has come to light however after all these years he hears about shetty (rami reddy) who is a famous arms smuggler but was once the driver of chhote pathan and he informs that when pooja was abducted 10 years ago, it was this shetty who driving the car pooja was screaming for help in. arjun asks where he will find shetty and eventually finds shetty beating him and his men. he reminds shetty of babu whom he killed and his pooja who was abducted and asks where his sister his. shetty tells him that d.k sharma knows as he is now the boss after chhote pathan's and rajjo singh's death. arjun asks where sharma is, shetty informs him that he is returning with his daughter, but, when shetty tries shooting him, he is shot by the commissioner, who arrived in the nick of time. arjun informs him he now has a chance to find sharma and he has to reach him, the commissioner tells him that for years he has helped so the law will help him. from the police control room they watch the passengers that come out of the flight sharma is in and they spot sharma in the camera. arjun then leaves to find sharma is taking a girl named tina on a rajasthan tour.
tina (kareena kapoor) is on a train who will be the one to help him get what he wants. he believes she's the daughter of one of the thugs who kidnapped his sister. however, through series of revelations from tina that he disappears as he finds out tina is someone else's daughter. tina is heartbroken. arjun finds sharma at the airport where he boards a car to leave the airport, he then chases d.k sharma by banging his car intoto an under-construction building. sharma tries to escape but in vain as arjun catches him. sharma asks who he is. arjun tells him he is babu's son whom he killed and abducted his daughter, sharma is stunned. arjun brutally interrogates him as to where his sister is, sharma tells that he doesn't know so he takes him to the edge of the building threatening to throw him down, sharma says that rajjo singh knows where his sister is. arjun is shocked and tells him that rajjo singh died years ago but sharma reveals that for the law and the world he is dead but he is still alive, he then asks if chhote pathan is alive too, but sharma says he is dead. he asks where rajjo singh is, sharma tells him that he dropped rajjo singh at the airport and he left with his daughter tina to south africa, arjun then lets go of sharma where he falls to his death. he returns to the mental asylum where the doctor tells him that her mother that she thinks the doctor's daughter is her daughter pooja. arjun promises that next year both pooja and the doctor's daughter will tie rakhi on his wrist.
back at the police control room, the commissioner shows a camera footage that rajjo singh is indeed alive. arjun feels that he has failed but the commissioner tells that not to lose hope as now his battle has just started. the commissioner tells he will in search of rajjo singh travel to south africa where he will meet sardar vichitra singh (gulshan grover), a retired mumbai crime branch constable turned taxi driver in south africa after retirement.
arjun travels to south africa and meets sardar vichitra singh, he tells him that he has come to search for rajjo singh.
arjun eventually reveals the truth behind her dad's deeds. tina is devastated and can't bear to know the pain her dad has caused. she confronts him and he realizes his mistakes. unfortunately, before he can reveal where chhote pathan has kept pooja, he is shot and killed. he dies in tina's arms. tina tells arjun to follow rocky only he is the one who can lead him to his sister so arjun follows rocky and kills some of his henchmen later he indulges in a fight with him but chhote pathan comes in the scene which shocks arjun and rocky and his goons beats him very badly however later arjun becomes successful in taking pooja from the clutches of chhote pathan, in the end, arjun kills rocky and chhote pathan and comes back to india with pooja and reunites with tina and his family. police commissioner congratulates him for being successful in his mission.


== cast ==
akshay kumar as arjun
kareena kapoor as tina
pooja batra as kamini
suresh oberoi as babu, arjun's father
raakhee as purnima (arjun's mother)
kabir bedi as chhote pathan, the leader of women trafficking kingpin
rami reddy as shetty (chhote pathan's driver and henchman)
gulshan grover as sardarji, vichitra singh
shakti kapoor as upadhyay
dalip tahil as d.k. sharma
ashish vidyarthi as police commissioner
sharat saxena as black john,mafia don
jeetu verma as junior,black john brother
raj babbar as rajjo singh (rs), the leader of drug trafficking kingpin and pathan's partner, tina's father
arbaaz ali khan as rocky (chhote pathan's henchman)
anirudh agarwal
razak khan as razak khan, a tt
upasana singh
vrajesh hirjee as pepsi
dinesh hingoo as astrologer in train
viju khote as popatbhai
supriya karnik as kokilaben
kunika
veeru krishnan as mummy
dolly bindra
rakesh bedi


== soundtrack ==
music was composed by nadeem shravan while lyrics were penned by sameer.


== external links ==
talaash: the hunt begins... at imdb 
talaash: the hunt begins... at bollywood hungama