tamaar padaar (transl.bang) is a 2014 indian malayalam-language satirical comedy film written and directed by dileesh nair and produced by m. renjith through the company rejaputhra visual media. it stars prithviraj sukumaran, baburaj, and chemban vinod jose. the film's soundtrack was composed by bijibal. the film was released on 3 october 2014.


== plot ==
jumper thambi and tubelight mani are street performers. jumper thambi does stunts like bike jumping and tubelight mani does stunts with tubelight. they do not know each other in the beginning but once they meet each other at a temple festival, they instantly becomes good friends. once they decide to do a stunt together for media visibility. they both tried to squeeze-in through a bicycle tube but ends up getting stuck.
acp pouran, whose main intention is to stand out among his colleagues misunderstands. while jumper thambi and tubelight mani are struggling to get out of the bicycle tube, acp happens to see them by accident. acp finds resemblance between jumber thambi and a notorious terrorist. he arrests them both and puts them in trial. the ruling party takes undue advantage of this situation by taking all credits and meanwhile all international anti-terrorist organizations also wants to get these two in custody.
acp pauran later understands the truth and now wants them released at all cost. he tries the legal way but gets no help from his superior officers. finally the duo is sentenced to death penalty. acp pauran helps them escape by faking proof that they were hanged. in the end we see both jumper thambi and tubelight mani living in an unknown place with a bearded look away from their old lives and means.


== cast ==
prithviraj sukumaran as acp pouran
baburaj as jumper thambi and terrorist (dual role)
chemban vinod jose as tubelight mani
srinda ashab as valsamma
vijay babu as purushan
ashvin mathew as minister john katuparamban
manju sunichen as kanakam
shammi thilakan as kumaran
jojet john
anjali aneesh as vanitha, purushan's wife
dhaneeh as iddaly kallan


== production ==
the film marks the directorial debut of screenwriter dileesh nair who also wrote the film's screenplay. the film was produced by m. renjith. the role of jumper thampi was earlier offered to biju menon. vijay babu appears in the flashback scenes as purushan, pouran's father. filming began in sabarimala in april 2014. it was also filmed in thiruvananthapuram. the title tamaar padaar is an onomatopoeia word in malayalam that refers to the sound of a blast in comics.


== reception ==
the film was released on 3 october 2014. it mostly received negative response from critics.


== references ==