tarkieb is a 2000 indian crime drama film directed by esmayeel shroff and produced by jay mehta. it stars nana patekar, tabu, shilpa shetty, aditya pancholi, milind soman and ashutosh rana in pivotal roles. the film was shot in panchmarhi.


== plot ==
a clothes washer girl finds a hand in a creek where she was washing clothes. she and other clothes washers nearby gather together and summon the police. after an investigation, the police find various parts of this body, and determine it to be that of a young woman. they do not succeed in finding the head of the corpse, and a check with missing persons produces negative results. when inspector pyare mohan, who was assigned to this investigation, receives a threat by an anonymous caller on the phone, he recommends that this file be closed. then additional evidence surfaces, and the case is turned over to cbi office jasraj patel, who along with his assistant, gangaram, arrive to take over this investigation. they find out that the corpse is indeed of a young woman, roshni choubey. roshni comes from a poor family of four unmarried sisters. roshni seemed to be involved with several men of army hospital, including dr. kamal dogra (ashutosh rana), mohan multani (aditya pancholi), captain ajit verma (milind soman) and bishen nanda (akhilendra mishra) - all of whom have a motive for killing her and disposing of her body. determining who is the real killer - is the challenge that now faces jasraj, apart from the telephonic threat that he too has received from the anonymous caller. patel delves into the case even more deeply, putting his life at risk as the killer is constantly trying to bump him off. eventually, patel concludes that roshni might not have been killed by any of the men she was involved with.
in the end, it is revealed that bishen nanda has killed roshni as she becomes the object of his lust. jasraj patel finally succeeds in nabbing roshni's murderer and putting him behind bars.


== cast ==
nana patekar...cbi asst director jasraj patel
tabu...lt roshni bharawaj
shilpa shetty...lt preeti sharma
aditya pancholi...mohan multani, businessman
milind soman... captain  ajit sharma ne verma, amc
ashutosh rana... -major (dr) kamal dogra
tiku talsania...ganga ram / musafir singh
akhilendra mishra... ex-l/ nk bishan nanda, mess & canteen contractor
raghuvir yadav...nainsukh (blind shopkeeper)
razzak khan...dr. sunder trivedi, gold-tooth specialist
javed khan...ice cream vendor
deepak qazir... inspector pyare mohan
vinod nagpal ... chandrakant choubey, roshni's father
cyrus herald ... police commissioner
vijay kumar ... home minister
annapoorna ... lali
pradeep karnaik ... cbi director
meghana tiwari ... shanti, roshni's immediate younger sister
farah ... second  roshni ashwini, roshni's second sister for roshni
aayukti ... nandini, roshni's youngest sister
smith ... multani's son
neha ... multani's daughter
menaka ... call girl
qamar khan ... rto officer
razzaq siddiqui ... station master
amit srivastava ... hotel boy
shahzad sheikh ... driver
suzanne rodrigues... singer in club dil mera tar se


== soundtrack ==
all songs were written by nida fazli. soundtrack is disc  mobile available on zee music.


== references ==


== external links ==
tarkieb at imdbart director- vimlesh b.lal