teesri aankh (english: the third eye) is a 2006 indian action-techno thriller film starring sunny deol and amisha patel, and directed by harry baweja. the film's plot is inspired by michael powell's controversial cult masterpiece peeping tom, however the story adds traditional bollywood flair including a love story and much less provocative themes than powell's film. the film is also inspired by the 1994 movie mute witness. it was a flop at the box office.


== plot ==
sudama pandey (mukesh rishi) is a notorious criminal who runs a global operation of capturing women on camera. he operates out of london and is assisted by his two partners in crime (mukesh tiwari and murli sharma).
be it a honeymoon bedroom, changing rooms, girls hostels, none of these places miss the third eye; the eye of a camera. first they capture girls on film and blackmail them, then abuse them, both physically and mentally.
one such girl who gets trapped by them is sapna (neha dhupia), an air hostess. she is a lovely girl who has dreams of making it big in her career. she found the love of her life through her fianc, arjun singh. sudama installs hidden cameras in her changing room and blackmails her into doing blue films in exchange for the hidden camera footage he took of her. sudama does nasty things with her, but gives her the film afterward. she is murdered by sudama's gang not long after.
as luck would have it, the murder is witnessed by ammu (amisha patel) who tries to rescue sapna but her efforts are in vain. ammu is traumatized by the events, but soon finds herself in danger as sudama begins plotting to kill her.
meanwhile, ammu's sister aarti (aarti chabaria) and her partner rahul (aashish chaudhary) are searching for sapna after her disappearance. arjun (sunny deol), who turns out to be an a.c.p. in mumbai, is also seeking his fianc's whereabouts, investigating sudama as he was the last person seen with her. his investigation leads him to london, where the only clue that could give him any answers turns out to be the sole witness  ammu.
unfortunately ammu herself gone missing. he makes all possible attempts to find her but reaches a dead end. without ammu he has nowhere else to turn. the race is on to find her and solve the case. but it won't be easy, because arjun just doesn't have to fight criminals  he also has to fight technology.


== cast ==
sunny deol ... acp arjun singh
amisha patel ... ammu
neha dhupia ... sapna
mukesh rishi ... sudama pandey
aarti chhabria ... aarti
aashish chaudhary ... rahul
mukesh tiwari ... dinesh 1
murli sharma ... dinesh 2
ayub khan... inspector vikram
jazzy b ... himself  song chug de punjabi


== soundtrack ==
the songs were composed by sukhshinder shinda, nitz 'n' sony and harry anand.  
one of the songs "assi teri gul karni", by harry anand, is a straight lift from pakistani pop singer abrar ul haq's song "assan jana mall-o mall" from the namesake album.
the lounge version of "sharabiyon" rendered by asha bhonsle, composed by newcomers nitz 'n' sony was on the bbc charts; and is a part of the platinum collection of 8 life time best songs by asha bhonsle. the lyrics of "sharabiyon" were written by nitin "nitz" arora himself.


=== track listing ===


== references ==


== external links ==
teesri aankh: the hidden camera at imdb