temptation is a 1946 american film noir thriller film directed by irving pichel and starring merle oberon, george brent, charles korvin and paul lukas. the film was based on robert smythe hichens's 1909  novel bella donna.the 1923 film bella donna, starring pola negri, which was directed by george fitzmaurice is also based on that novel. other versions were filmed in 1915 and 1934.


== plot ==
victorian melodrama, set in egypt, where a down-on-her-luck courtesan (oberon) snares a loving but naive egyptologist (brent), marries him and moves to egypt.  she quickly becomes bored and embarks on an affair with mamhoud baroudi (korvin).  she falls in love with him, and together, they plot to do away with her husband.


== cast ==
merle oberon as ruby
george brent as nigel armine
charles korvin as mahoud baroudi
paul lukas as sir meyer isaacson
lenore ulric as marie
arnold moss as ahmed effendi
robert capa as hamza
aubrey mather as dr. harding
ludwig stssel as dr. mueller
andr charlot as prof. dupont
suzanne cloutier as yvonne dupont
gloria lloyd as jean mccormick


== production ==
the film was the first producer edward small had made away from united artists for a number of years. he bought the rights to the novel in 1941 intending to make it as a vehicle for ilona massey who had just made international lady for him. he intended to make the film for united artists but other projects took priority. over a five-year period there were several near-starts and postponements; he almost managed to begin production in february 1946 but there was not enough studio space. small's deal with united artists expired so the film became the first shot at universal by international under the new united world pictures arrangement.


== reception ==
film critic bosley crowther panned the film when it was released, writing "true enough, miss oberon looks lovely, mr. korvin behaves with bold sang-froid and george brent is sufficiently unimpressive to seem a husband that a dame would double-cross. paul lucas, arnold moss and lenore ulric also act as though they thought they had a script. but the whole thing is as claptrap in its nature as it was when pola negri played it back in 1923."variety magazine panned the screenplay, writing "production is well-stacked with solid values in every department except for the screenplay, which falls short in its attempt to stretch an unsubstantial story line over so long a running time."


== references ==


== external links ==
temptation at imdb
temptation at allmovie
temptation at the tcm movie database