tenth avenue angel is a 1948 american film directed by roy rowland and starring margaret o'brien, angela lansbury, and george murphy. it chronicles the life and family of flavia mills (margaret o'brien) in the late 1930s. filming took place 11 march15 may 1946, with retakes in april 1947. however, the film was not released until february 20, 1948.


== plot ==
eight-year-old flavia (margaret o'brien) lives in a new york tenement during the great depression with mother helen (phyllis thaxter) and father joe (warner anderson), who's nearly broke and needs a job. her aunt susan (angela lansbury) lives with them, too.
flavia's thrilled because susan's sweetheart steve (george murphy) is returning from a one-year absence. the little girl is unaware that steve's been in jail for associating with a gangster.
flavia sees a mouse and is afraid. her mother tells flavia a fable that if you catch a mouse and make a wish, it will turn into money. this leads her to hide a mouse in a cigar box in the alley near the blind newspaper man's stand (mac) (rhys williams). two neighborhood youths rob mac and by coincidence hide the money right by the girl's box with the mouse. flavia finds it and is overjoyed until the adults accuse her of stealing it from blind mac. her mother has to tell her the truth about the fable and flavia realizes that so many stories she has heard are "lies".
everybody's desperate for money. helen's pregnant and faces physical complications. steve's unable to get his old job, driving a taxi. the gangster offers him a payday for stealing a truck, but steve's conscience gets the better of him at the last minute. flavia tries to find the kneeling cow near a railroad before it's too late.  helen is all right, joe finds a job and flavia's thrilled because susan's going to marry steve.


== cast ==
margaret o'brien as flavia mills
angela lansbury as susan bratten
george murphy as steve abbott
phyllis thaxter as helen mills
warner anderson as joseph mills
rhys williams as blind mac
barry nelson as al parker
connie gilchrist as mrs. murphy
charles cane as parole officer
richard lane as street vendor


== reception ==
the film was an expensive failure at the box office, earning only $725,000 in the us and canada and $75,000 elsewhere, resulting in a loss of $1,227,000.it has received mixed to negative reviews.


== references ==


== external links ==
tenth avenue angel at the tcm movie database
tenth avenue angel at imdb
tenth avenue angel at allmovie
tenth avenue angel at the american film institute catalog
rotten tomatoes