terror squad is a 1987 action film directed by peter maris. the film stars chuck connors.


== plot ==
1987. in libya, a crowd is rallying at an anti-american speech.  the crowd excitedly waves rifles and banners, while burning an american effigy.  the movie then cuts to kokomo, indiana, showing a regular day at the old kokomo high school (now central middle school). several students are stuck in detention after school.
four terrorists cross the canadaus border, and they attempt to attack the blackriver nuclear power plant (a mythical power plant in howard county, indiana) with a car bomb.  after this fails, the remaining three escape, pursued by several police cruisers.  chief rawlings (chuck connors), the kokomo police department chief, is radioed, and he and the other officers join the chase.
two terrorists manage to survive and escape to kokomo high school, where they hold the detention's students and teacher hostage. the kokomo swat team surrounds the school, and chief rawlings attempts to negotiate the release of the hostages. meanwhile, the terrorists kill several hostages that attempt to resist them. chief rawlings agrees to the terrorists' demand for a bus so they can get to an airport. the two terrorists drag a girl out with them, and they board the school bus. in the process, a boy running along the roof manages to jump on top of the school bus and tries to get in the bus as the terrorists lead the police on a high-speed car chase.
eventually, the bus tips over. the lone surviving terrorist attempts to kill himself and the girl by pulling the pin on a grenade. the boy knocks him out, and he and the girl manage to escape from the bus before the grenade explodes.


== production ==
the majority of the film was shot in kokomo, indiana, with a  few parts shot in michigan city, indiana and the opening scene shot in istanbul). although most of the major characters were professional actors, many residents of kokomo were hired to work as extras or assistants on the set. kokomo residents will notice that the paths of the car chases do not make sense; as in most films, scenes were stitched together after filming.


== cast ==
chuck connors as chief rawlings
brodie greer as capt. steiner
bill calvert as johnny
kerry wall as jennifer
kavi raz as yassir
joseph nasser as gamal
budge threlkeld as mr. nero
dennis moynahan as norman
ken foree as deputy brown
nathan dyer
lisa beth ross as larissa
baggie hardiman as gus
jill sanders
marco kyris as hassan


== reception ==
the film received mixed reviews. variety considers the movie interesting, despite its absurd plot. dennis schwartz criticized the movie for being clumsily, with poor production and one-dimensional characters.


== references ==


== external links ==
terror squad at imdb
terror squad at rotten tomatoes