thamizh padam (transl.tamil film) is a 2010 indian tamil-language parody film written and directed by c. s. amudhan in his directorial debut. the film stars shiva and disha pandey in the lead roles. thamizh padam was the first full-length spoof in tamil cinema. it parodies contemporary commercial films and actors in tamil cinema, mocking the stereotypical scenes.the film was distributed by dhayanidhi alagiri under the banner cloud nine movies, and it was released on 29 january 2010. it won critical acclaim and commercial success at the box office. the film was later remade in telugu as sudigadu starring allari naresh. a sequel called thamizh padam 2 was confirmed and released in july 2018.


== plot ==
in the indian village of cinemapatti, male infanticide is predominant, and all male babies are required to be killed immediately after birth. one such baby is headed for such a fate, until he "speaks" to his caretaker-grandmother (paravai muniyamma) and asks to be sent to chennai on a goods train, where he plans to grow into a hero. the old woman complies, and takes the baby, named shiva, to chennai and raises him herself, living in the city's poorer section.
on growing into manhood, shiva (shiva) gains a reputation by giving a massive entry by beating up extortionists by throwing them in the air and saving a rape victim; soon he is glorified as a "mass hero". he manages to defeat gangster devaraj with a clever exchange of puns and a costumed associate. he spends his time hanging out, drinking and playing carrom with his gang of friends, composed of nakul (m. s. bhaskar), bharath (venniradai moorthy) and siddharth (manobala).
shiva runs into a headstrong girl named priya (disha pandey) whom he falls in love with. after learning of her hatred for men, he realises that she has dedicated her life to classical dance, learns bharatanatyam over the course of a night, and performs an exaggerated dance sequence for her. she reciprocates his feelings, and the two start a relationship. shiva is then challenged by priya's rich and powerful father kodeeswaran, who refuses to give his daughter to a poor man. shiva swears to become a billionaire, and promptly does so, during the course of a 2:50-minute song.
kodeeswaran accepts shiva as a suitor, and fixes his engagement to priya. during the ceremony, shiva hears a passing comment that he does not know his own father. offended, he travels to cinemapatti, accompanied by bharath, to learn his roots. after encountering a host of tamil-cinema stereotypes of several decades ago, he succeeds in uniting with his family when a woman (revealed to be shiva's father's concubine) leads him to his father, mother and sister. he finds them when they sing their "family song" (the michael learns to rock number, "someday").however, unknown to anyone,shiva has been targeting and killing several criminals in secret; he kills female gangster swarna by making her slip over a banana peel; makes another big-time crook laugh to death; tortures a drug dealer to commit suicide by continuous failed attempts on his life; and kills his final victim with the odour of his sock. the police discover that he is the killer, and it is revealed that shiva is actually an undercover officer and was killing the criminals under direct orders from not only the commissioner, but also from the president of the united states.
the ganglord who commandeered the slain criminals, a mysterious person simply called "d", organises the kidnapping of priya by telling pandian(sathish), and his henchmen to kidnap her and has shiva beaten up. shiva recovers, saves priya by fighting off thugs using exaggerated stunts, and comes face to face with "d", revealed to be his grandmother. she explains that she did it to increase the fame of her grandson, and a heartbroken shiva is forced to arrest her.
at the trial, shiva accidentally kills an assassin who targets his grandmother, and is put on trial himself. he is saved, however, when a man who had helped him in cinemapatti earlier testifies that shiva was a victim of circumstance. both shiva and "d" are pardoned, and shiva who has been promoted to dgp, unites happily with priya, his family and friends.


== cast ==


== production ==
s. sashikanth, who was looking for scripts for his debut production for his production banner y not studios got in touch with c. s. amudhan who was willing to make his directorial debut submitted three pitches in different genres for his consideration, out of which sashikanth chosen the script of spoofs and went ahead with it.


== release ==
in order to receive the film a wide release, sashikanth opted to sell the film dayanidhi alagiri who distributed and released the film under his company cloud nine movies.


=== reception ===
upon release, the film received critical acclaim en route to becoming one of the box office successes of the year in tamil nadu. rediff.com called the film a "must watch", while sify.com labelled the film as a "rollicking comedy" and gave particular praise for shiva's performance and the director's script and dialogues.however the times of india rated it 2.5/5, commenting, "it's a brilliant idea, to make a mocumentary of tamil cinema, and the very concept raises your expectations" and concluded, "having dared to test the waters, the director seems to have stepped back in apprehension."


== soundtrack ==
the film's soundtrack was composed by debutant kannan. the soundtrack contains five songs.


== list of notable spoofs ==


=== films ===


=== people ===
kamal haasan  when a conversation mentions that virumaandi is a good man and all that he does gets misconstrued.
vijay  at the beginning of the film, there are references to his punch dialogues and also imitates the slogan saying that particular hero has sung the song. later, siva flexes his muscles like vijay did in vettaikaran.
a. r. rahman  the judge declares that the government has to award a golden globe award to paravai muniyamma, to which she says "ella pugazhum iraivanukke" (a popular dialogue uttered by rahman at the 2009 academy awards).
nayantara  during the song kuthu vilakku, a man dances in a bikini with a tattoo on his back, similar to nayantara's tattoo in billa.
fathima babu/shobana ravi  the tv reporter says her name is fathima ravi  a combination of the two famous newsreaders from doordarshan tv.
silambarasan  the nattamai character declares that anyone who disobeys his law will be forced to watch silambarasan's films 100 times.
jothika  the heroine introduction scene in which the girl who abuses her husband mentioning that she want to go to pub with her friend trisha to have drinks.
rajinikanth  siva becoming a rich man within one song is similar to the scenes in rajinikanth movies of annamalai and padayappa.


=== soundtrack ===
"pacha manja" - this song parodies introductory songs of film stars which has lyrics written to suit star's image.
"kuthu vilakku" - this song parodies item numbers which appeared in commercial films and these songs mostly happens at antagonists' place.
"oru sooravali" - this song parodies the song "vetri nichayam" and from the films directed by vikraman where male protagonist's transformation from poor guy to rich guy happens within one song.
"o mahazeeya" - this song parodies romantic duets in tamil cinema and lyrics of the song contains gibberish terms which coincidentally named after the chartbuster song names in tamil cinema.


=== others ===
hutch  when priya calls siva's mobile phone, his ring tone is set to hutch's signature tune and a dog follows him as depicted in the hutch advertisement. he eventually gives brandy to the dog to stop it from following him.
zoozoos from vodafone  after siva beats up the rowdies to save priya, the zoozoos attempt to defeat siva in the name of booboos.
santoor soap  when siva finds a girl being a young mother of a small girl, he utters "mummy" similar to the advertisement.


== notes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
thamizh padam at imdb
tamil padam starcast interview