thanedaar  (transl. police officer) is a 1990 indian hindi-language action film, produced by sanjay ray, sudhir roy under the shiva arts international banner and directed by raj n. sippy. it stars jeetendra, jaya prada, sanjay dutt, madhuri dixit  and music composed by bappi lahiri. the film is perhaps most remembered for the hit song tamma tamma loge and its quirky dancing moves. it was 23rd time that jeetendra and jaya prada paired together and the second pairing of dutt and dixit, who went on to star in 7 films together including big box office blockbusters saajan (1991) and khalnayak (1993). thanedaar was the fourth highest-grossing film of 1990. the film is a remake of tamil movie anbukku naan adimai (1980).


== plot ==
police inspector jagdish chandra (dalip tahil) has been investigating gangster thakur azghar singh (kiran kumar). eventually, the inspector is murdered by lawrence (goga kapoor) and peter (tej sapru), foreigners hired by azghar to kill the inspector. jagdish has two young sons, brijesh and avinash, now left alone to fend for themselves. brijesh kills the assailant and is taken away by peter and lawrence, whereas the other son avinash is adopted by the police commissioner grows up (jeetendra) and becomes a police inspector like his father. brijesh (sanjay dutt) has just been released from the jail, and he attempts to rob a jewelry store after which he elopes with his girlfriend, chanda (madhuri dixit) to the same village where his father lived. while on his way to the village a fight takes place between the two brothers, not knowing about the relationship with each other. one day in the village he gets to identify about avinash and starts dominating over the villagers and takes the bribe from azghar singh. the matter gets complicated when avinash's wife, sudha (jayapradha) comes out in search of her husband only to see that chanda is being molested by azghar and his men, forcing brijesh to take a stand. will azghar be successful in throwing brijesh out of the village?


== cast ==
jeetendra as avinash chandar
jaya prada as sudha chandar
sanjay dutt as brijesh chandar (birju)
madhuri dixit as chanda
kiran kumar as thakur ajghar singh
goga kapoor as lawrence
tej sapru as peter
mahesh anand as mangal
satish shah as rangeele
kunika as munni
paintal as hawaldar dukhiram
sharat saxena as sunny
harish patel as hawaldar bechare
mansour as master ladoo (cameo appearance)
viju khote as hawaldar sukhiram
dalip tahil as jagdish chandar (cameo appearance)
sudha chandran as mrs. j. chandar (cameo appearance)
tabassum
subbiraj as police commissioner


== soundtrack ==


=== tamma tamma loge ===
the song became an instant chartbuster due to its quirky dance moves and lyrics. the dance steps are similar to the famous michael jackson song "bad". it is well known that dutt had great difficulty performing the dance moves, especially the famous scene with the chairs, and though he spent almost a month training, in an interview, choreographer saroj khan talked about the shooting the song, which took 48 takes to get okayed.the tune was inspired by two songs from mory kant's 1987 album akwaba beach: "tama" and "y k y k". there were also plans to remix the song by director duo abbas mustan for their film players, but later these plans were scrapped due to there not being enough time before the release of the film.
the song was reprised for the 2017 film badrinath ki dulhania, by tanishk bagchi.


== reception ==
thanedaar was well received by a number of critics. the film scored well at the box office grossing 10.25 crore nett and was declared a superhit. it was also the fourth highest-grossing film of the year 1990.


== references ==


== external links ==
thanedaar at imdb