the house across the lake is a 1954 british crime drama film, released in the united states as heat wave.  the film noir drama, filmed and set in england, stars alex nicol and hillary brooke, who are the only americans in the cast, although brooke plays a british character, as she did in most films. (her mastery of a "posh" accent caused her to be typecast as british in hollywood films starting in the 1940s.)sid james plays a prominent supporting role in which he is, unusually for him, a "good guy".


== plot ==
an american pulp novelist, mark kendrick (nicol), meets his rich neighbours across the lake and is soon seduced by beautiful blonde carol (brooke), the wife of beverly forrest (james), despite beverly treating him as a friend. when beverly is badly injured by a fall on his boat, carol fails to persuade mark to throw him overboard, so carol does it.
after first refusing to go along with her plan to call it an accident, mark agrees when carol tells him that they will meet up again later and live off her dead husband's money. however, after the coroner rules the death an accident, mark does not hear from her, but the still suspicious cid inspector on the case arranges for mark to find out that carol has secretly married another old flame and changed residences. mark angrily confronts her, but she sneers that she only used him and that there is nothing he can do about it without implicating himself. mark decides to confess, thinking that, although it will probably mean a prison sentence for him, it will mean the rope for carol.


== cast ==
alex nicol as mark kendrick
hillary brooke as carol forrest
sid james as beverly forrest (credited as "sidney james")
susan stephen as andrea forrest
paul carpenter as vincent gordon
alan wheatley as inspector maclennan
peter illing as harry stevens
gordon mcleod as doctor emery
joan hickson as mrs. hardcastle
john sharp as mr. hardcastle
hugh dempster as frank


== production ==
the film was based on a novel by ken hughes, high wray, published in 1952.it was filmed at bray studios.


== reception ==
according to an obituary of ken hughes, "the film was praised by critics, and began hughes's ascent into more important productions. "filmink said "its quite a fun movie, reminiscent of the postman always rings twice; one is inclined to wonder if nicols character, a writer under the pump and distracted by lust, was a hughes self-portrait."


== references ==


== external links ==
the house across the lake at imdb
the house across the lake at allmovie
house across the lake at letterbox dvd
house across the lake at bfi
the house across the lake at reel streets
review of film at cinema retro