the comedy man is a 1964 british kitchen sink realism drama film directed by alvin rakoff and starring kenneth more, cecil parker, dennis price and billie whitelaw. it depicts the life of a struggling actor in swinging london.more later said that when he read the script he "was profoundly struck by its relevance to my own life, and to the lives of so many actors i had known." the film was shot in 1962 but not released until two years later. it received limited distribution, being released on a double bill with lord of the flies (1963).


== plot ==
sacked from his job in provincial rep, actor chick byrd moves into digs in london with julian, a fellow actor. julian's career soars after a successful screen test, but chick's meets with continued failure. after the suicide of an actor friend, jack lavery, chick is informed by his widow that just after jack's death he was offered a job by tommy morris, an agent.
chick contacts tommy and takes jack's job for a tv commercial.  chick finally finds fame when the commercial is a hit and he's signed for a series of commercials for breath mints. confident of his talents for the first time, but fearing he may have sold out, chick leaves london to return to rep.


== cast ==
kenneth more - chick byrd
cecil parker - thomas rutherford
dennis price - tommy morris
billie whitelaw - judy
norman rossington - theodore littleton
angela douglas - fay trubshaw
edmund purdom - julian baxter
frank finlay - prout
alan dobie - jack lavery
j.g. devlin - sloppitt
valerie croft - yvonne
leila croft - pauline
gerald campion - gerry
jacqueline hill - sandy lavery
harold goodwin - assistant director
penny morrell - actress
naomi chance - bit part
guy deghy - schuyster
derek francis - merryweather
myrtle reed - tommy's secretary
edwin richfield - commercial director
gordon rollings - skippy
eileen way - landlady
freddie mills - indian chief/union steward
frank thornton - producer
john horsley - co-pilot
wally patch - bar manager
talitha pol - actress at party
hamilton dyce - burial minister
anthony blackshaw - bus conductor
richard pearson - advertising man
maurice durant - barman
ronald lacey - assistant director
jill adams - jan kennedy
robert raglan - man at party
alan browning - actor at audition


== critical reception ==
radio times wrote, "written by peter yeldham with a nice balance between irony and drama, and directed by alvin rakoff with an accurate eye for the dingy environments and brave bonhomie of unemployed actors, this modest british film boasts a superior cast" ; while allmovie wrote, "matching more's terrific starring performance are such british "regulars" as dennis price, billie whitelaw, cecil parker, norm rossington, and frank finlay" ; and the sunday mirror noted, "kenneth more in the greatest performance of his career. brilliantly directed." 


== references ==


== external links ==
the comedy man at imdb