the adventures of sebastian cole is a 1998 american comedy-drama film written and directed by tod williams and starring adrian grenier as the title character.


== plot ==
in june 1983 in dutchess county, new york, sebastian cole's stepfather, hank, drops a bomb: he announces that he is having a sex change operation. sebastian's sister, jessica, leaves immediately for california, and his mother, joan, takes him back to england. eight months later, sebastian is back in new york, knocking on hank's door. hank (now henrietta) takes sebastian in and supports him over the next few months of high school. sebastian's "adventures" are mostly self-destructive.


== cast ==
adrian grenier as sebastian cole
clark gregg as hank/henrietta rossi
aleksa palladino as mary
margaret colin as joan cole
john shea as hartley
marni lustig as jessica cole
joan copeland as grandma cole
tom lacy as grandpa cole
gabriel macht as troy
russel harper as wayne
rory cochrane as chinatown
famke janssen as fiona
nicole ari parker as nurse jenny
marisol padilla snchez as woman in desert
levon helm as bob


== reception ==
on rotten tomatoes the film has an approval rating of 43% based on reviews from 23 critics.roger ebert gave the film three out of four stars, noting that the film avoids easy cliche in favour of a more thoughtful approach to the subject matter. he gave particular praise to clark gregg saying that, whilst one is never in doubt about his gender because of his physical appearance, "in his heart he knows he is a woman, and he is true to that inner conviction with a courage that the film doesn't need to underline, because it permeates the performance". stephen holden of the new york times praised adam greiner's performance feeling that it "beautifully captures his character's precarious balance of naivete and bravado, self-destructiveness and self-invention".writing in variety, joe leydon believed that the scenes between gregg and grenier were the strongest (although he felt that gregg's portrayal came close to caricature). he was critical of the technical aspects of the film's production, felt that other films had covered similar ground better and that the ending was poorly conceived and too abrupt. he predicted that the film would perform poorly with critics and at the box office. entertainment weekly's owen gleiberman gave the film a "b" rating, adding that he wished it had been better structured, although the current configuration was "integral" to its "charm".


== see also ==
list of american films of 1999
transgender in film and television


== references ==


== external links ==
the adventures of sebastian cole at imdb
the adventures of sebastian cole at allmovie
the adventures of sebastian cole at box office mojo