the lego ninjago movie is a 2017 live action/computer-animated martial arts adventure-comedy film based on the toy line of the same name and the animated tv series ninjago: masters of spinjitzu. directed by charlie bean, paul fisher and bob logan (in their feature directorial debut) from a screenplay by logan, fisher, william wheeler, tom wheeler, jared stern, and john whittington, it is the first theatrical film to be based on an original lego property. it is the third film in the lego movie film series as well as its second and final spin-off. starring the voices of dave franco, michael pena, kumail nanjiani, abbi jacobson, zach woods, fred armisen, jackie chan, justin theroux, and olivia munn, the film focuses on lloyd garmadon, a teenage ninja, as he attempts to accept the truth about his villainous father while a new threat emerges to endanger his homeland.
the film is an international co-production of the united states and denmark . the film was produced by the warner animation group alongside ratpac entertainment, lego system a/s, dan lin's lin pictures, phil lord and christopher miller's lord miller productions, and roy lee's vertigo entertainment, and was released in the united states on september 22, 2017 in 2d, 3d, and dolby cinema formats by warner bros. pictures. it was not as well received, getting mixed reviews from critics. as it grossed $123.1 million worldwide against its $70 million budget, the film was the franchise's first box-office bomb.


== plot ==
a young boy meets the mysterious owner of a relic shop, mr. liu, who tells him the story of ninjago, a city within the lego universe. it is frequently terrorized by the evil warlord garmadon, who is the father of teenager lloyd garmadon and estranged husband of koko. everybody in the city of ninjago hates lloyd for being garmadon's son, which puts lloyd under emotional stress. unbeknownst to them, lloyd is the green ninja and part of a secret force of ninja warriors comprising nya, zane, jay, cole, kai and their master named wu, who always stop garmadon from taking over ninjago city by fighting with mechs. when garmadon is again unsuccessful at conquering ninjago, his tech division shows him a giant new mech.
lloyd and his friends see the return of master wu, who tells them that only their "unique element" will defeat garmadon. lloyd is frustrated to learn his element is green. jay has lightning, cole has earth, zane has ice, nya has water and kai has fire. wu also mentions an "ultimate weapon", giving lloyd new hope of stopping garmadon, despite wu warning them that nobody can ever use the device. the next day, garmadon attacks ninjago city with his giant mech and this time defeats lloyd. as garmadon gloats, lloyd returns with the ultimate weapon and fires it, only to reveal that it is really a laser pointer that attracts a live-action cat named meowthra. garmadon points the laser at the ninja's mechs, which the cat destroys, but lloyd breaks the laser pointer. as garmadon celebrates his victory, lloyd unmasks himself and denounces his father, leaving garmadon confused.
lloyd meets up with his friends and master wu, who tells them they must use an "ultimate, ultimate weapon" to stop meowthra from destroying ninjago city, which can be found on the other side of ninjago island. garmadon overhears wu talking about the weapon, follows close behind, intercepts wu and fights him only to end up in a cage defeated. however, wu loses his balance and falls off a bridge into the river below. before being swept away, he tells the ninja they must find "inner peace". the ninja continue on with garmadon leading them, much to lloyd's disappointment. despite this, the two bond throughout their journey, while the ninja learn not to rely solely on their mechs to fight. the group survives an encounter with garmadon's fired generals, and garmadon teaches lloyd to throw.
they eventually crash down onto the temple of fragile foundations, garmadon's childhood home. he tells lloyd that he wishes he had stayed with him and his mom after deciding to conquer ninjago, but he couldn't change so they had to stay apart. the ninjas find the ultimate, ultimate weapon, a chest consisting of a set of lego pieces that resemble their elemental powers, only to have it stolen by garmadon, who remains resolute in taking over the city after lloyd rejects his offer to replace a mutinous general. in a villainous turnaround, garmadon locks all of them inside the temple as it begins to collapse. lloyd realizes that "inner peace" means that they must unleash their elemental power, and they escape from the collapsing temple. as they fall off a cliff, wu saves them with his flying ship, the "destiny's bounty", and they head back to ninjago city.
garmadon arrives and tries to defeat meowthra with the ultimate, ultimate weapon, but meowthra eats him whole instead. lloyd and the crew arrive and begin fighting garmadon's army. as lloyd approaches meowthra, he reveals to everyone that he is the green ninja and realizes that green means life and that his element is what connects the ninjas together and his family together. he comforts meowthra and apologizes to garmadon profusely, saying that he forgives him. garmadon cries tears of fire, which causes meowthra to vomit him out. after lloyd and his father are reconciled, meowthra becomes the mascot of ninjago and lloyd is hailed as a hero.
as the story finishes, mr. liu informs the boy that he will start training him as a ninja at dawn after the boy shows potential.


== cast ==

dave franco as lloyd, the green ninja, leader of the secret ninja force, lord garmadon and koko's son and master wu's nephew.
michael pea as kai, the hotheaded red ninja of fire and nya's brother.
kumail nanjiani as jay, the quiet and cautious blue ninja of lightning.
abbi jacobson as nya, the strong silver ninja of water, kai's sister, and jay's crush.
zach woods as zane, the robotic white ninja of ice.
fred armisen as cole, the laid-back music-loving black ninja of earth.
jackie chan as master wu, the wisecracking leader of the group, lord garmadon's brother and lloyd's uncle.
chan also plays mr. liu, an elderly shopkeeper who appears in the live-action part of the film.
justin theroux as lord garmadon, the lord of evil, an evil warlord, the father of lloyd, the ex-husband of koko and the brother of master wu.
olivia munn as koko, lord garmadon's ex-wife and lloyd's mother. she was formerly known as the legendary "lady iron dragon" when she worked as a warrior-queen.
randall park and retta as chen and maggie, the cheerleaders at ninjago high school who bully lloyd.
constance wu as the mayor of ninjago.
charlyne yi and vanara taing as terri and asimov, the it nerds working for lord garmadon.
chris hardwick as a radio dj working in ninjago city.
robin roberts as herself, a lego caricature of the newscaster. in the uk version, she is replaced by kate garraway.
michael strahan as himself, a lego caricature of the known media personality and former new york giants defensive end. in the uk version, he is replaced by ben shephard.
david burrows as a fuchsia ninja who has the "element of surprise."
alex kauffman as ninja computer.
ali wong as general olivia, the fish-themed general of garmadon's shark army.
todd hansen as general omar, the shark-themed general of garmadon's shark army.
doug nicholas as general jollty, the jellyfish-themed general of garmadon's shark army.
bobby lee as the owner of a pilates studio in ninjago city.
laura kightlinger as mrs. laudita, a teacher at ninjago high school.
pearl and ruby as meowthra, a live-action cat that terrorizes ninjago.
kaan guldur as a young boy who appears at the live-action part of the film whom mr. liu tells the story of ninjago to. at the end of the film, he begins to train as a ninja by mr. liu as the story ends.


== production ==
on september 17, 2013, warner bros. announced that it was developing an animated ninjago film based on the lego toy line lego ninjago. the hageman brothers, who wrote the ninjago: masters of spinjitzu show and co-wrote the story of the lego movie, would write the adaptation. charlie bean was announced as director, and the lego movie team of dan lin, roy lee, and phil lord and chris miller as producers. on june 27, 2016, the film's voice cast was announced, including dave franco, michael pea, kumail nanjiani, zach woods, fred armisen, jackie chan, and abbi jacobson. additional voice cast included justin theroux as lord garmadon and olivia munn as koko.


=== filming ===
in order to give the film a more believable father-son atmosphere, dave franco and justin theroux recorded most of their lines where their characters interact with each other together in a single recording studio. during the process, franco openly admitted he found himself uncontrollably crying while recording some of his lines. franco stated "i found myself getting caught up in the moment and basically crying harder than i have in any live-action movie ive ever been in".jackie chan choreographed all of master wu's fight scenes in live action before they were recreated in animation for the film. chan found the experience new to him as well as interesting. everything the stunt team does, the ninja do also, chan commented.


== soundtrack ==
mark mothersbaugh, who composed the score for the lego movie, returned to score the lego ninjago movie. along with the score, the album includes master wu's flute music, played by greg pattillo, and five new songs created for the movie. the song "bad blood" by taylor swift featuring kendrick lamar appeared in the film's trailers but is not included on the score album; other pop songs in the film are likewise not included.

all tracks are written by mark mothersbaugh and performed by the sydney scoring orchestra, except as noted.


== release ==
the lego ninjago movie premiered at the regency village theater on september 16, 2017, before it was widely released in the united states by warner bros. pictures on september 22, 2017, in 3d, reald 3d, and dolby cinema. it was originally scheduled for a september 23, 2016 release. the film was released in denmark on september 21, 2017. it was released in the philippines on september 27, 2017.a short film, the master, that promoted the feature film was shown in front of screenings of storks, which took the original september 23 release date. on february 8, 2017, the first trailer was released. the trailer was shown in front of screenings of the lego batman movie. on july 22, 2017, a second trailer for the film was shown as part of san diego comic-con and released on youtube later in the day. both trailers feature the song "bad blood" by taylor swift, with the second trailer also featuring "it must have been love" by roxette, "ain't gonna die tonight" by macklemore and "i wanna go out" by american authors.
the lego ninjago movie was originally planned for an imax release, as evident in trailers (attached to pirates of the caribbean: dead men tell no tales and transformers: the last knight), and facebook, but was cancelled and only received non-imax presentations and then eventually, kingsman: the golden circle took over the imax screenings.


=== marketing ===
over twenty lego sets inspired by scenes from the film were released for the film including a set of collectible minifigures. a video game by tt fusion based on the film, the lego ninjago movie video game, was released on september 22, 2017, for windows pc, nintendo switch, playstation 4 and xbox one. the game is similar to previous lego games, with some new features such as multiplayer and new techniques.


=== home media ===
the lego ninjago movie was released on digital hd on december 12, 2017, and dvd, blu-ray, blu-ray 3d and 4k blu-ray on december 19, 2017, by warner bros. home entertainment.


=== video game ===

based on the lego ninjago movie, it was released for microsoft windows, nintendo switch, playstation 4, and xbox one, alongside the film, in north america on 22 september 2017, and worldwide on 20 october 2017. it serves as the second spin-off video game and the third game in the lego movie franchise.


== sets ==


== reception ==


=== box office ===
the lego ninjago movie grossed $59.3 million in the united states and canada, and $63.8 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $123 million against a $70 million budget.
in north america, the film was released alongside kingsman: the golden circle and friend request. various tracking services had the film projected to gross anywhere from $2744 million from 4,047 theaters in its opening weekend. however, after making $5.8 million on its first day, weekend projections were lowered to $21 million. it ended up debuting to $21.2 million, finishing third at the box office and ranking as the lowest opening of the lego franchise by over 50%.


=== critical response ===
on review aggregation website rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 56% based on 133 reviews and an average rating of 5.83/10. the site's critical consensus reads, "despite ample charm and a few solid gags, the lego ninjago movie suggests this franchise's formula isn't clicking like it used to." on metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 55 out of 100 based on 33 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "b+" on an a+ to f scale.andrew barker of variety wrote: "plenty entertaining and occasionally very funny, ninjago nonetheless displays symptoms of diminishing returns, and lego might want to shuffle its pieces a bit before building yet another film with this same model."


=== accolades ===


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
official website at lego.com
the lego ninjago movie at imdb
the lego ninjago movie on rotten tomatoes