the limits of control is a 2009 american film written and directed by jim jarmusch, starring isaach de bankol as a solitary assassin, carrying out a job in spain. filming began in february 2008, and took place on location in madrid, seville and almera, spain. the film was distributed by focus features. it received mixed reviews, and as of may 17, 2020, has a 42% rating on the review aggregator rotten tomatoes, having been criticized for its slow pace and inaccessible dialogue while praising its beautiful cinematography and ambitious scope.


== plot ==
in an airport, lone man (isaach de bankol) is being instructed on his mission by creole (alex descas). the mission itself is left unstated and the instructions are cryptic, including such phrases as "everything is subjective," "the universe has no center and no edges; reality is arbitrary," and "use your imagination and your skills." after the meeting in the airport he travels to madrid and then on to seville, meeting several people in cafs and on trains along the way.
each meeting has the same pattern: he orders two espressos at a cafe and waits, his contact arrives and in spanish asks, "you don't speak spanish, right?" in different ways, to which he responds, "no." the contacts tell him about their individual interests such as molecules, art, or film, then the two of them exchange matchboxes. a code written on a small piece of paper is inside each matchbox, which lone man reads and then eats. these coded messages lead him to his next rendezvous.
he repeatedly encounters a woman (paz de la huerta) who is always either completely nude or wearing only a transparent raincoat. she invites him to have sex with her but he declines, stating that he never has sex while he is working. one phrase that creole, the man in the airport tells him is repeated throughout the movie: "he who thinks he is bigger than the rest must go to the cemetery. there he will see what life really is: a handful of dirt." this phrase is sung in a flamenco song in a club in seville at one point in his journey.
in almera, he is given a ride in a pickup truck - driven by a companion of the mexican (gael garca bernal) - on which the words la vida no vale nada ('life is worth nothing') are painted, a phrase guitar (john hurt) says to him in seville, and he is taken to tabernas desert. there lies a fortified and heavily guarded compound. after observing the compound from afar, he somehow penetrates its defenses and waits for his target inside the target's office. the target (bill murray) asks how he got in, and he answers, "i used my imagination." after the assassination with a guitar string, he rides back to madrid, where he locks away the suit he has worn throughout the movie and changes into a sweatsuit bearing the national flag of cameroon. before exiting the train station onto a crowded sidewalk he throws away his last matchbox.


== cast ==
isaach de bankol as lone man
bill murray as american
tilda swinton as blonde
gael garca bernal as mexican
hiam abbass as driver
paz de la huerta as nude
alex descas as creole
john hurt as guitar
youki kudoh as molecules
jean-franois stvenin as french
scar jaenada as the waiter
luis tosar as violin


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
the limits of control at allmovie
the limits of control at box office mojo
the limits of control at imdb
the limits of control at rotten tomatoes
the limits of control at the jim jarmusch resource page
los limites del control spanish site