the general is an irish crime film written and directed by john boorman about dublin crime boss martin cahill, who pulled off several daring heists in the early 1980s and attracted the attention of the garda sochna, ira, and ulster volunteer force. the film was shot in 1997 and released in 1998. brendan gleeson plays cahill, adrian dunbar plays his friend noel curley, and jon voight plays inspector ned kenny.


== plot ==
the story of dubliner martin cahill, who pulled off two daring robberies but came into conflict with members of his gang and attracted attention from the police and the ira and whose dealings with the uvf ultimately led to his downfall.


== cast ==
brendan gleeson as martin cahill
adrian dunbar as noel curley
sean mcginley as gary
maria doyle kennedy as frances
angeline ball as tina
jon voight as inspector ned kenny
eanna macliam as jimmy
tom murphy as willie byrne
paul hickey as anthony
tommy o'neill as paddy
john o'toole as shea
ciarn fitzgerald as tommy
ned dennehy as gay
vinny murphy as harry (as vinnie murphy)
roxanna williams as orla


== production ==
the film is based on the book of the same name by irish journalist paul williams, who is "special correspondent" for the irish independent.
director boorman was himself one of cahill's burglary victims. this event is dramatized in a scene in which cahill breaks into a home, stealing a gold record and pilfering a watch from the wrist of a sleeping woman. the gold record, which cahill later breaks in disgust after discovering it is not made of gold, was awarded for the score of deliverance, boorman's best-known film.
filming was at various locations around dublin, including south lotts and ranelagh. though shot in color, the theatrical release of the film was presented in black-and-white for artistic reasons, while an alternate version of the desaturated original color print was subsequently made available for television broadcast and home video. asked why he chose to depict cahill's life in black-and-white, boorman later explained: 

i love black-and-white, and since i was making the film independently  i borrowed the money from the bank  there was no one to tell me i couldn't. if i had made [the general] for a studio, they wouldn't let me do that. the other reason, the main reason, was because it was about recent events and people who were still alive. i wanted to give it a little distance. black-and-white gives you that sort of parallel world. also, it's very close to the condition of dreaming, to the unconscious. i wanted it to have this mythic level because i felt this character was an archetype. all throughout history, you find this rebel, this violent, funny, brilliant kind of character. i wanted to make that kind of connection, and black-and-white film helps. up until the middle to late '60s, it was a choice to film in black-and-white or color. but then television became so vital to a film's finance, and television won't show black-and-white. so that killed it off, really.


== reception ==
the general was nominated for and won several awards, including best director at the 1998 cannes film festival and the grand prix of the belgian syndicate of cinema critics.the film holds an approval rating of 82% based on 49 reviews on rotten tomatoes.the film grossed 1.6 million ($2.8 million) in the uk and ireland, the second highest-grossing irish film of the year, behind the butcher boy. in the united states and canada it grossed $1.2 million for a worldwide total of at least $4 million.


== see also ==
list of films featuring diabetes


== references ==


== external links ==
the general at imdb
the general at box office mojo