the ghosts of berkeley square is a 1947 british comedy film, directed by vernon sewell and starring robert morley and felix aylmer.  the film is an adaptation of the 1944 novel no nightingales by caryl brahms and s. j. simon, inspired by the enduring reputation of the property at 50 berkeley square as "the most haunted house in london".  despite its stellar cast of highly respected character actors and its inventive use of special effects, the film proved less successful at the box-office than had been hoped.


== plot ==
two 18th century officers, general burlap (morley) and colonel kelsoe (aylmer), are desperate to prevent war, so they hatch a plan to capture the duke of marlborough and hold him prisoner until the threat of hostilities passes. unfortunately, while testing the efficacy of the contraption they have designed to entrap the duke, they manage to kill themselves. their stupidity prevents the planned visit of queen anne for tea. as punishment, they are condemned to haunt the berkeley square house until such time as a british monarch visits the property.
things get off to a rocky start when the ghosts of burlap and kelsoe blame each other for the fiasco, quarrel, and refuse to speak to each other for 66 years.  once they have resolved their differences, they set about trying to engineer the required royal visit.  over the decades they interact with the succession of different occupants of the house, but never manage to lure a monarch to enter.  as the years pass, the house becomes variously the home of a french-run bordello with drinking, gambling and fornication; an indian rajah complete with harem; the home of the p. t. barnum theatre: a boer war soldiers' hospital and a world war i officers' club.  their time as earth-bound ghosts eventually comes to an end when berkeley square is bombed during an air raid and queen mary comes to visit the damaged properties, allowing the pair finally to take their place in the afterlife.


== main cast ==


== see also ==
list of ghost films


== references ==


== external links ==
the ghosts of berkeley square at the british film institute
the template bfidb title is being considered for deletion. the ghosts of berkeley square at the british film institute's film and tv database
the ghosts of berkeley square at imdb
the ghosts of berkeley square at britmovie (archived)