the man in the mirror is a 1936 british comedy film, directed by maurice elvey and starring edward everett horton, genevieve tobin and ursula jeans.


== plot ==
jeremy dilke, a withdrawn, mild-mannered man, works in the city. he is preparing an important report on nitrates, but his partner considers him too weak-willed to proceed with the deal. on the tube home veronica, his partner's flirtatious wife, contrives to get off the tube at his stop and get him to walk her home. her plot is foiled by dilke's wife, helen, who takes him home in a taxi.
jeremy tells off helen and her mother, and both women leave the dilke home. 
alone in the house, he is surprised when his reflection in the mirror steps out and tells him that he is his alter ego, the kind of man he wishes he was. the man-in-the-mirror then begins to live the more aggressive life that the man had always dreamed of.
he kisses his wife with new passion and flatters his mother-in-law. he also takes command at the office, startling his partner into submission.
the real dilke no longer sees his reflection in any mirror. while the new dilke stays at home romancing his wife, the real dilke can't go home, and is forced to stay in town. the real dilke checks into a hotel under the name of thompson, to avoid meeting the new dilke. veronica spots him and presumes he is open to having an affair under his assumed name.
his partner is eager to close his nitrates deal with two visiting potentates. vengeful against jeremy, the partner schemes to squeeze jeremy out of his share of the business. jeremy sees through the scheme and beats him at his own game. now successful and happy, jeremy and his reflection agree to unite and co-operate.


== production ==
the film was produced in england by julius hagen. the film's sets were designed by the art director andrew mazzei. grand national pictures released the film in america.


== cast ==
edward everett horton as jeremy dilke
genevieve tobin as helen dilke
ursula jeans as veronica tarkington
garry marsh as charles tarkington
aubrey mather as bogus of bokhara
alastair sim as the bogus's interpreter
renee gadd as miss blake
viola compton as mrs. massiter
stafford hillard as dr. graves
felix aylmer as earl of wigan
merle tottenham as mary
syd crossley as the porter


== references ==


== bibliography ==
low, rachael. filmmaking in 1930s britain. george allen & unwin, 1985.
sutton, david r. a chorus of raspberries: british film comedy 1929-1939. university of exeter press, 2000.
wood, linda. british films, 1927-1939. british film institute, 1986.


== external links ==
the man in the mirror at imdb