the poor little rich girl is a 1917 american comedy-drama film directed by maurice tourneur. adapted by frances marion from the 1913 play by eleanor gates. the broadway play actually starred future screen actress viola dana. the film stars mary pickford, madlaine traverse, charles wellesley, gladys fairbanks (returning from the play) and frank mcglynn sr.
the film was shot in fort lee, new jersey when early film studios in america's first motion picture industry were based there at the beginning of the 20th century. in 1991, the poor little rich girl was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the united states library of congress and selected for preservation in the national film registry.


== plot ==

gwendolyn is an 11-year-old girl who is left by her rich and busy parents to the care of unsympathetic domestic workers at the family's mansion. her mother is only interested in her social life and her father has serious financial problems and is even contemplating suicide. 
when she manages to have some good time with an organ-grinder or a plumber, or have a mud-fight with street boys, she is rapidly brought back on the right track. 
one day, she becomes sick because the maid has given her an extra dose of sleeping medicine to be able to go out. she then becomes delirious and starts seeing an imaginary world inspired by people and things around her; the garden of lonely children in the tell-tale forest. her conditions worsen and death tries to lure her to eternal rest. but life also appears to her and finally wins.


== cast ==
mary pickford as gwendolyn
madlaine traverse as gwendolyn's mother
charles wellesley as gwendolyn's father
gladys fairbanks as jane
frank mcglynn sr. as the plumber
emile la croix as the organ grinder
marcia harris as miss royale
charles craig as thomas
frank andrews as potter
herbert prior as the doctor
george gernon as johnny blake
maxine elliott hicks as susie may squoggs


== see also ==

list of united states comedy films
mary pickford filmography


== references ==


== further reading ==
schmidt, christel, ed. (2013). mary pickford: queen of the movies. library of congress/university press of kentucky. isbn 978-0-8131-3647-9.
schmidt, christel (2003). "preserving pickford: the mary pickford collection and the library of congress". the moving image. association of moving image archivists. 3 (1): 5981. doi:10.1353/mov.2003.0013. s2cid 191609277.(subscription required)


== external links ==
 media related to the poor little rich girl at wikimedia commons

the poor little rich girl essay by eileen whitfield at national film registry
the poor little rich girl at imdb
the poor little rich girl at the tcm movie database
the poor little rich girl is available for free download at the internet archive
the poor little rich girl essay by daniel eagan in america's film legacy: the authoritative guide to the landmark movies in the national film registry, a&c black, 2010 isbn 0826429777, pages 5728 [1]