the arizona kid is a 1939 american western film directed by joseph kane under the republic pictures banner. the film stars roy rogers as a confederate officer in missouri during the american civil war.


== plot ==
roy and gabby are confederate scouts in missouri during the american civil war. val mcbride is a confederate guerilla officer, who doesnt play by the rules. when roy first rides into town, he encounters an old childhood friend, dave allen. dave tells roy that he has joined mcbrides guerilla force and roy is not pleased. he tells dave that mcbride is not a man to be admired but dave doesnt listen. 
mcbride arrives at the saloon where dave and roy are talking and roy and mcbride nearly end up in a fight. the arrival of union scouts prevents the fight as mcbride and his force, including dave, ride away. shortly afterwards, mcbride is told by his superior confederate officer that he must play by the rules or be stripped of his command. mcbride, furious that his effective (if crude and ungentlemanly) fighting is being scorned, leaves the confederates and continues to fight both sides on his own.
roy and gabby are soon assigned to tracking down and killing mcbride and his men. during a brief pause in their search, roy, gabby, and the men they have recruited agree to take a small shipment of gold through to another confederate officer. en route, mcbride attacks. gabby is hurt, though not seriously, while roy is nearly killed. dave (still one of mcbrides men) hangs back and helps gabby get roy to a nearby cabin for help. then he leaves to rejoin mcbride.
roy and gabby set out to resume their search a few months later. after a long and dangerous search, roy and gabby find and corner mcbrides men including dave, but mcbride escapes. while gabby takes care of business, roy chases mcbride to a local saloon and boarding house where the matron hides mcbride and refuses to tell roy where he is. mcbride comes out and takes a shot at roy but misses and roy returns fire, killing mcbride.


== cast ==
roy rogers as roy rogers
george "gabby" hayes as "gabby" whittaker
sally march as laura radford
stuart hamblen as val mcbride
dorothy sebastian as bess warren
robert middlemass as general stark
earl dwire as dr. jason radford
david kerwin as dave allen
peter fargo as henchman sheldon
fred burns as melton  volunteer
lisa ann as mother of roy rogers


== external links ==
the arizona kid at the american film institute catalog
the arizona kid at imdb
the arizona kid is available for free download at the internet archive