the trap is a canadian-british romantic adventure film released in 1966, written by david d. osborn and directed by sidney hayers. shot in the wilderness of the canadian province of british columbia, oliver reed and rita tushingham star in this unusual love story about a rough trapper and a mute orphan girl. the soundtrack was composed by ron goodwin and the main theme (main titles to the trap) is familiar as the title music used by the bbc for london marathon coverage.
the film had its world premiere on 15 september 1966 at the leicester square theatre in the west end of london.


== plot ==
french-canadian fur trapper jean la bte (oliver reed) paddles his canoe through wild water towards the settlement in order to sell a load of furs.
at the settlement, a steamboat is landing and the trader and his foster-child eve (rita tushingham) arrive at the seaport to fetch mail and consumer goods. the trader explains to eve that the ship brings "jailbirds ... from the east" and that "their husbands-to-be had bailed them out and paid their fines and their passages with a guarantee of marriage". later, the captain is auctioning one of those women because her husband-to-be has died in the meantime. jean la bte decides to take his chance to buy the wife but he makes his bid too late.
two american indians, yellow dog and no name, have told the trader that la bete is dead. the trader, heavily in debt, has spent money he owes la bete so that when la bete calls to collect his dues, the trader has to use own savings, to the fury of his wife. next day, the trader's wife, to compensate for the loss of her savings, seizes the opportunity to offer her foster-child for a thousand dollars to the simple-minded, rough-cut trapper. she praises the qualities of the shy girl and explains, that her inability to speak is caused from the shock she suffered when she had to witness how her parents were barbarously murdered several years ago.
la bte finally agrees to buy the mute girl and takes her against her will into the wilderness of british columbia. here the strange couple starts a difficult relationship characterized by mistrust and eve's fear and dislike of the trapper. eve vehemently rejects the advances of the gruff trapper. la bte takes her for hunting and acquaints her with the beauty and the dangers of the wilderness but here, as well, he fails to win her trust. eve defends herself from his advances with a knife.
one day, on checking his traps for caught animals, la bte is threatened by a cougar. he shoots the cat but inadvertently gets his foot into his own bear trap. badly injured, he tries to drag himself back to his hut, hunted by famished wolves. eve is waiting at the cabin and hears the distant howling of the wolves approaching the hut. she takes a gun and sets out in search for la bte; together they can get rid of the wolf pack. la bte's lower left leg is broken, so he asks eve to bring the medicine man from the next indian village, a two days trip away. the canadian winter has already come, so eve puts on her snowshoes and starts a long, arduous walk over snow-covered hilltops. she finally reaches the village only to find it deserted.
returning empty-handed, eve finds la bte already suffering from sepsis (blood poisoning). having no time to lose, he urges the terrified girl to immediately cut off his poisoned leg using an axe. after la bte has stunned himself by gulping the last drop of rum, eve acts as commanded and her patient instantly passes out from pain. eve nurses the trapper and of necessity learns to hunt on her own and becomes capable of providing for the couple. eventually, after la bte learns to say 'please' to her and then thanks her for saving his life and declares he could not live without her, they become intimate.
the morning after, eve seems to regret her decision and leaves the cabin, holding a rifle against la bete who follows her to the river, angry and perplexed. eve flees in his canoe, leaving la bete floundering in the shallows. her journey is fraught and she is thrown from the canoe in white-water rapids. the empty canoe is found by native americans and eve is rescued, being taken to the settlement where other white people reside. although welcome, she remains an outsider. the viewer is told that she remained in bed for two months and lost the child she was carrying. the settlers have arranged a marriage for her to a man who flirted with her early on in the film. eve does not appear happy, however.
on the day of marriage, her foster 'sister' and foster mother dress her whilst the 'sister' demands to know how she lived in the wild and if she killed la bete. eve runs away again finally to return to the man she has come to love, jean la bte. she arrives on the river beach and la bete touches her face gently, then welcomes her home by telling her to clean the house! eve smiles. in the last scene, she stands in the doorway and watches la bte hobbling into the forest singing a song. eve chops wood and carries it into the cabin.


== cast ==
rita tushingham as eve
oliver reed as jean la bte
rex sevenoaks as the trader
barbara chilcott as the trader's wife
joseph golland as baptiste
linda goranson as the trader's daughter
merv campone as yellow dog
jon granik as no name
reginald mcreynolds as the captain
walter marsh as the preacher
blaine fairman as the clerk


== production ==
filming took place in autumn 1965 in panorama studios in west vancouver (it was one of the first films ever shot there). it resumed in 1966 in scotland.


== london marathon theme tune ==
a tune from goodwin's score for the film is used every year as the theme tune for the bbc's live coverage of the london marathon, performed by the bournemouth symphony orchestra.


== references ==


== external links ==
the trap at imdb
photo gallery at rita tushingham fansite