the hi-lo country is a 1998 american western drama film directed by stephen frears, starring billy crudup, penlope cruz, woody harrelson, cole hauser, sam elliott, patricia arquette, enrique castillo, and katy jurado. it is set in post-world war ii new mexico and is based on the western novel by max evans.


== plot ==
in the early post-world war ii years, best friends big boy matson (woody harrelson) and pete calder (billy crudup) return home to find half of their town employed by corporate cattle baron jim ed love (sam elliott). hanging on to the mythic ideals of the american west big boy and pete team up with an old time rancher hoover young (james gammon) to raise cattle the cowboy way and life in hi-lo, new mexico becomes a volatile powder keg.
the fuse is lit when mona (patricia arquette), the wife of jim ed's foreman, begins a heated affair with big boy. pete's past longings for mona resurface with his discovery of the affair and the bond of friendship becomes sorely tested. ultimately, pete and big boy's friendship will be decided by the extent of their yearnings for the same woman, while hi-lo awaits the outcome of the explosive run-ins between jim ed love and two proud cowboys.


== cast ==
billy crudup as pete calder
woody harrelson as big boy matson
patricia arquette as mona birk
penlope cruz as josepha o'neil
cole hauser as little boy matson
sam elliott as jim ed love
james gammon as hoover young
enrique castillo as levi gomez
katy jurado as meesa, the mexican witch
darren burrows as billy harte
jacob vargas as delfino mondragon
robert knott as jack couffer
john diehl as les birk
bob tallman as himself
lane smith as steve shaw
rosaleen linehan as mrs. matson
rose maddox as big boy's grandmother
leon rausch as band singer
don walser as band singer
marty stuart as band singer
chris o'connell as band singer
connie smith as band singer


== reception ==
the film was regarded by critics and film festivals as an example of the "classic" western movie genre.bob graham of the san francisco chronicle said, "the traditional settings of westerns are honored: the saloon, the dance hall, the rodeo, the cattle drive, the snowstorm. hi-lo is not only the name of the high-country flatlands where the story takes place, it is also a poker game, and that western cliche is given a good spin, too."stephen holden of the new york times said, "in its best moments the movie feels like an epic hybrid of red river and the last picture show."the score by carter burwell, and the western swing songs of floyd tillman, vaughn monroe, eddy arnold, merle travis, tex williams, and hank williams and sequence performances by don walser and leon rausch, were well regarded.


== awards ==
winner silver bear for best director (stephen frears) - 49th berlin international film festival.
nominated golden bear award - berlin international film festival
nominated best actress (penlope cruz) - alma awards
nominated best actress (katy jurado) - alma awards
nominated best supporting actor (enrique castillo) - alma awards
winner best breakthrough performance (billy crudup) - national board of review
winner bronze wrangler award (best motion picture of the year) - western heritage awards
winner best screenplay - drama (walon green) - western writers of america


== home media ==
on december 18, 2012, shout! factory rereleased the film on dvd.


== references ==


== external links ==
the hi-lo country at imdb
the hi-lo country at box office mojo
the hi-lo country at rotten tomatoes