the kid from texas is a 1950 american film that was audie murphy's first technicolor western and the first feature film on murphy's universal-international pictures contract.  it was directed by kurt neumann and featured gale storm and albert dekker.


== plot ==
the film starts 11 july 1879 in lincoln county, new mexico territory. a group of men who work for major harper, led by gunslinger minniger, attempt to arrest rancher alexander kain and his english partner jameson. they are stopped by william bonney, aka billy the kid, who shoots and injures them.
jameson offers billy a job as a ranch hand. a drunken group of harper's men attack the ranch and kill jameson. billy goes on a killing rampage, encouraged by the manipulative kain, who publicly decries billy's efforts. governor lew wallace offers billy a pardon which he turns down. pat garrett is sent to catch billy.


== cast ==
audie murphy as billy the kid
gale storm as irene kain
albert dekker as alexander kain
shepperd strudwick as jameson
will geer as o'fallon
william talman as minniger
martin garralaga as morales
robert h. barrat as general lew wallace
walter sande as crowe
frank wilcox as pat garrett
dennis hoey as major harper
ray teal as sheriff rand
don haggerty as morgan
paul ford as sheriff copeland
john phillips as sid curtis
harold goodwin as matt curtis
zon murray as lucas
tom trout as denby
rosa turich as maria
dorita pallais as lupita
pilar del rey as marguarita


== production notes ==
the film fictionalises the true events of the lincoln county war but follows the basic facts. jameson (shepperd strudwick) is based on john tunstall and alexander kain (albert dekker) on alexander mcsween.
murphy was cast after his performance as a juvenile delinquent in bad boy, with billy the kid being depicted as a 19th-century juvenile delinquent. j. edgar hoover offered to narrate the film. however, parley baer was chosen as the narrator.


== references ==


== external links ==
the kid from texas at imdb
the kid from texas at audie murphy memorial site
the kid from texas at the tcm movie database