all american (titled the winning way in the uk) is a 1953 american drama film directed by jesse hibbs and starring tony curtis and lori nelson.


== plot ==
a star quarterback, nick bonelli isn't told by his coach until after winning a game that his parents have been killed in a car crash on their way to the stadium. angered by the coach's insensitivity, nick quits the team and the school.
he decides to study architecture at a chicago university called sheridan but refuses to play football. a professor warns him that things are different at this school and that nick will need to conform, including getting a shorter haircut. he makes only one friend, howard carter, and is soon subjected to hazing and insults from other students, including a fraternity that rejects him.
a seductive waitress, susie ward, causes a fight that leads to a rift between nick and howard, and the latter being placed on academic probation. the architecture professor's secretary, sharon wallace, takes an interest in nick and his troubles at school.
susie, who is candid about wanting to marry a rich sheridan man someday, persuades nick to join the football team. "we want nick" chants from the spectators precede his finally getting into a game, which nick promptly wins with a touchdown. with a new haircut and new popularity, he is invited to join the frat.
a drunken howard is tricked by susie into proposing marriage. when she learns from nick that howard is trouble at the school, she angrily hits nick with a bottle. he is arrested, disgraced and thrown off the team.
nick watches the next game from a bar. susie has a guilty conscience, however, and explains what happened. nick is reinstated and rushes to the stadium by halftime. his play wins the game, and sharon realizes that she's in love with him.


== cast ==
tony curtis as nick bonelli
lori nelson as sharon wallace
richard long as haward carter
mamie van doren as susie ward
gregg palmer as hunter cameron (as palmer lee)
paul cavanagh as professor carl banning
barney phillips as coach clipper colton
jimmy hunt as whizzer
stuart whitman as zip parker
douglas kennedy as tate hardy
donald randolph as david carter
herman hickman as coach jumbo campbell
frank gifford as stan pomeroy
tom harmon as himself
jim sears as dartmore quarterback
elmer willhoite as kenton
donn moomaw as jonas


== references ==


== external links ==
all american at imdb
all american film clip on youtube