the lost world is a 1960 de luxe color and a cinemascope fantasy adventure film directed by irwin allen and loosely based on the 1912 novel of the same name by arthur conan doyle. the plot of the film revolves around the exploration of a plateau in venezuela inhabited by cannibals, dinosaurs, carnivorous plants, and giant spiders. the cast includes claude rains,
david hedison, fernando lamas, jill st. john, and michael rennie.


== plot ==
professor challenger (claude rains), a celebrated biologist and anthropologist, reports to the london zoological society that he has discovered living specimens of supposedly extinct animals, including dinosaurs, on an expedition to the amazon basin and up a barely known plateau.
much to challenger's dismay, he has attracted a few very unscientific people to join him on his second journey to the amazon. this expedition group includes big game hunter lord john roxton (michael rennie), newsman ed malone (david hedison) whose publisher advances $100,000 to pay for the expedition. the publisher's adventurous daughter, jennifer (jill st. john) and son david join the group at the head of the amazon. also, in the group is a zoological society bigwig (richard haydn), helicopter pilot gomez (fernando lamas) and sidekick jose costa (jay novello).
during the first night on the plateau, a dinosaur wrecks the helicopter. as the expedition proceeds, malone chases a primitive jungle girl (vitina marcus) through cobwebs to a giant spider. roxton argues with the others, and jealousies over jennifer leads to a fistfight between malone and roxton. they discover a diary of a previous explorer, burton, who was lost on the plateau. roxton is mentioned several times in the diary. roxton reveals that he had visited the plateau years before, and claims the plateau holds a bounty of diamonds.
at one point, malone and jennifer are separated from the others and have a near death encounter with two battling dinosaurs. cannibals kidnap the members of the party, but before they can become dinner the jungle girl leads them to a passage that leads down off the plateau. along the way, they encounter burton, now living as a blind hermit. they encounter more obstacles  pursuit by cannibals, spider plants, the "graveyard of the damned", and a dinosaur in a lava pit guarding the diamonds. during a volcanic eruption, they escape from the plateau carrying the egg of a tyrannosaurus rex. the egg hatches when it is dropped by accident, and professor challenger decides to take the infant dinosaur back to london with them.


== featured cast ==
michael rennie as lord john roxton  an experienced big-game hunter who joins the expedition.
jill st. john as jennifer holmes  the daughter of the owner of the global news.
david hedison as ed malone  a journalist at the global news who volunteers to join the expedition.
claude rains as professor george edward challenger  the short-tempered leader of the expedition.
fernando lamas as manuel gomez  the expedition's helicopter pilot.
richard haydn as professor summerlee  a rival of challenger's who joins the expedition.
ray stricklyn as david holmes  the brother of jennifer holmes and the son of malone's boss stuart holmes.
jay novello as costa  gomez's assistant who also guides the expedition into the plateau.
ian wolfe as burton white  a professor who visited the amazon plateau before challenger's expedition.
john graham as stuart holmes  edward malone's employer and the father of jennifer and david holmes.
colin campbell as prof. waldron who organises the expedition.
vitina marcus as the native girl.


== prehistoric creatures ==
iguanostyracus portrayed by an iguana with glued on horns
protostegosaurus portrayed by a monitor lizard with glued-on frills and plates
ceratopspinus portrayed by a spectacled caiman and an alligator with glued-on horns, fins, and a small sail.
centrotyrannus portrayed by a monitor lizard with a glued-on frill and sails.
baby centrotyrannus portrayed by a tokay gecko with glued-on horns and sails
giant spider portrayed by a mexican redknee tarantula
giant carnivorous vines


== production ==
in 1959, allen purchased the rights to doyle's novel for $100,000. he wanted to make the film with trevor howard and peter ustinov in support of rains, as well as victor mature and gilbert roland (who had been in the 1925 film). he hired charles bennett to help him adapt the book into a script and commissioned willis o'brien, who worked on the 1925 film, to do the models. he said he wanted to start filming on 15 october 1959.allen eventually received financing to make the film from buddy adler, head of production at 20th century fox.special effects for the film were rather basic and involved monitor lizards, iguanas, and crocodiles affixed with miniature horns and fins. director allen later stated that though he wanted stop motion models, he could only work with lizards and live creatures in accordance with the studio's budget.


== legacy ==
irwin allen utilized stock footage from this film for episodes of his various tv series, including land of the giants, lost in space, the time tunnel, and voyage to the bottom of the sea.  in 1966, irwin allen even tried to sell a tv series based on the film, as he had done with voyage to the bottom of the sea, but was unsuccessful. stock footage was also used in the movie when dinosaurs ruled the earth (1970).


== comic book adaptation ==
dell four color #1145 (august 1960)


== see also ==
list of american films of 1960
journey to the beginning of time (1967)


== references ==


== external links ==
the lost world (1960) at imdb.
the lost world at allmovie
the lost world at the tcm movie database
the lost world at the american film institute catalog
the lost world at rotten tomatoes