the crucible is a 1996 american historical drama film written by arthur miller adapting his 1953 play of the same title, inspired by the salem witchcraft trials. it was directed by nicholas hytner and stars daniel day-lewis as john proctor, winona ryder as abigail williams, paul scofield as judge thomas danforth, bruce davison as reverend parris, joan allen as elizabeth proctor, and karron graves as mary warren. much of the filming took place on hog island in ipswich, massachusetts.
despite the film's lackluster box office performance, arthur miller was nominated for the oscar for best adapted screenplay and joan allen received a nomination for best supporting actress. the performances of day-lewis, scofield, and ryder were also the subjects of critical praise.


== plot ==
early one morning in salem, massachusetts, in 1692, a group of young village girls meet in the woods with a barbadian slave named tituba, attempting to conjure love spells for certain men in their town. one of the girls, abigail williams, kills a chicken and drinks its blood, wishing for john proctor's wife elizabeth to die. they are discovered by abigail's uncle, reverend samuel parris. as the girls run away, parris' daughter betty falls over unconscious.
parris questions abigail about the events that took place in the woods; betty will not awaken, nor will ruth, the daughter of thomas and ann putnam, who was also dancing. this strikes mrs. putnam hard as she had seven other children before ruth who died at childbirth. the parris household is also visited by giles corey, who suspects that the children are just acting out, and john proctor, with whom abigail had an affair and whose wife she wants dead. abigail still loves proctor, but proctor has realized his mistake and left her. the putnams and reverend parris believe that betty and ruth are demonically possessed, so they call reverend john hale from nearby beverly to examine betty. to save herself and the other girls from punishment, abigail claims that tituba was working with the devil. after being whipped, tituba confesses to being a witch, and is saved from being hanged. struck by their new power, the other girls begin naming other women whom they "saw" with the devil.
john, determined not to give his former lover her vengeance, insists that his servant, mary warren, one of the "afflicted" girls, testify in court that the witchcraft was faked. although mary warren is frightened of abigail, she eventually agrees. in the court, francis nurse gives a list of names of people who vouch for the accused; in response, the judges order that all on the list be arrested and brought in for questioning. giles corey insists that when ruth putnam accused rebecca nurse, mr. putnam was heard to tell his daughter that she had won him a "fine gift of land". corey refuses to name the person who heard this remark, and the judges order corey's arrest. meanwhile, mary warren insists she only thought she saw spirits but is later cowed by the other girls into recanting her recantation. elizabeth proctor says she is pregnant and will be spared from death until the baby is born, but he insists on charging the girls with false witness.
the other girls are called in and asked if they were lying about the witchcraft but cause a commotion, screaming that mary warren is putting a spell on them. to demonstrate that abigail is not innocent, john confesses to having had an affair with her, claiming that abigail accused elizabeth in order to get rid of her so that she could marry him. abigail denies the accusation to protect her reputation, so elizabeth is called in to verify the accusation. however, unaware that john confessed and wanting to save his reputation, she lies. as reverend hale tries to persuade the court of john's honesty, the girls turn the court further against the proctors by screaming that mary warren is attacking them in the form of a yellow bird. although john correctly believes that they were pretending, as he had previously accused, the girls create another commotion, running outside from the "bird" into a nearby lake, making the court think that they are honest. to save herself from being hanged as a witch, mary warren accuses john of witchcraft. when asked if he will return to god, john despairingly yells "i say god is dead!" and is arrested as a witch.
on the day before john proctor is to be hanged, reverend hale confronts abigail at the now-abandoned homes of the victims whom she testified against. abigail attempts to convince the court that reverend hale's wife is also a witch (because hale was the lone official in the court who doubted her claims); however, this plot backfires as the judges do not believe her, because a minister's wife is considered to be pure. in time, the girls become outcasts and abigail steals reverend parris' money to catch a ship to flee to barbados, but not before asking john to go with her, telling him she never wished any of this on him. he refuses, stating "it's not on a boat we'll meet again, but in hell". on the eve of john's hanging, parris, fearing that his execution will cause riots in salem directed at him, allows john to meet with elizabeth to see if she can make her husband "confess" to save his life. john agrees and writes the confession. the judges insist that the confession must be publicly displayed with his own signature to prove his guilt and to convince others to confess, but john angrily shouts "leave me my name!" and tears up the confession, determined to keep his name pure for his sons. he is taken away to be hanged. john proctor, rebecca nurse and martha corey recite the lord's prayer, but before they finish, they are hanged and die.


== background ==
in 1952, miller's friend elia kazan appeared before the house un-american activities committee (huac); fearful of being blacklisted from hollywood, kazan named eight members of the group theatre, including clifford odets, paula strasberg, lillian hellman, and john garfield, who in recent years had been fellow members of the communist party. after speaking with kazan about his testimony, miller traveled to salem, massachusetts to research the witch trials of 1692. the crucible, in which miller likened the situation with the house un-american activities committee to the witch hunt in salem in 1692, opened at the beck theatre on broadway on january 22, 1953.
miller and kazan were close friends throughout the late 1940s and early 1950s (the latter had directed the original production of miller's death of a salesman), but after kazan's testimony to the huac, the pair's friendship ended, and they did not speak to each other for the next ten years. the huac took an interest in miller himself not long after the crucible opened, denying him a passport to attend the play's london opening in 1954. later miller was further checked out: when testimony came out that he misled the huac, he was sentenced to a $500 fine and a 30-day stay in jail. it was overturned on appeal. kazan defended his own actions through his film on the waterfront, in which a dockworker heroically testifies against a corrupt union boss.
though the play was widely considered only somewhat successful at the time of its first production, today the crucible is miller's most frequently produced work throughout the world. it was adapted as an opera by robert ward, which won the pulitzer prize for music in 1962.


== cast ==


== reception ==
the movie was not a box office success, making only $7,343,114 in the united states.


=== critical reception ===
the film has an overall score of 68% on the review aggregation website rotten tomatoes, based on 61 critic reviews, with an average rating of 7.3/10. the critics consensus states, "this staid adaptation of the crucible dutifully renders arthur miller's landmark play on the screen with handsome production design and sturdy performances, if not with the political anger and thematic depth that earned the drama its reputation." victor navasky of the new york times wrote that the film was "thought impossible to make during the mccarthy years" due to its allegorical connections to mccarthyism, yet was "probably destined for hollywood all along".owen gleiberman of entertainment weekly gave the film a grade of "a", calling the adaptation "joltingly powerful" and noting the "spectacularly" acted performances of day-lewis, scofield, and allen. roger ebert gave the film 2 out of 4 stars, writing that the "story has all the right moves and all the correct attitudes, but there is something lacking at its core; i think it needs less frenzy and more human nature". philip thomas of empire gave the film 5 out of 5 stars, calling it an "almost perfect screen adaptation".


=== awards and honors ===
the film is recognized by american film institute in these lists:

2008: afi's 10 top 10:
nominated courtroom drama film


== references ==


== external links ==
the crucible at imdb
the crucible at allmovie
the crucible at box office mojo
the crucible at rotten tomatoes