the man with my face is a 1951 american film noir directed by edward montagne featuring barry nelson, carole mathews and lynn ainley. the film marks jack warden's movie debut.though the original novel is set in california, the movie takes place in puerto rico. it is the only film noir shot on location in that country.


== plot ==
the film is set in puerto rico, where charles "chick" graham (nelson) has settled down after the war to run a small business with his old army buddy (now his brother-in-law) buster cox (harvey). graham comes home one evening to find his wife, cora (ainley), acting as if he is an insane stranger.
a man who looks exactly like him, albert "bert" rand (nelson), has taken his place and is playing cards and drinking in his living room. neither cora nor busternot even graham's dogrecognizes graham; they think that he, rather than rand, is the double.
meanwhile, his face has shown up on the front page of newspapers as a bank robber in miami who made off with half a million dollars. as graham runs from the police, he attempts to solve the mystery with the help of mary davis (mathews), an old girlfriend whom he jilted to marry cora. mary's protective brother, walt davis (warden), is wary but soon joins graham in trying to figure out the puzzle.
rand attempts to kill graham by hiring an attack dog specialist to have a doberman go after him. the evil double has been in on this sinister plan with cora and her brother, buster, since before the grahams' marriage.


== cast ==
barry nelson as charles "chick" graham / albert "bert" rand
carole mathews as mary davis
lynn ainley as cora cox graham
john harvey as buster cox
jim boles as meadows
jack warden as walt davis
henry lascoe as the police sergeant
johnny kane as al grant
chinita as juanita
armando miranda as nightclub bartender


== reception ==
film critic dennis schwartz was lukewarm about the film, writing: "the b film has a good premise over mistaken identity, but a lousy execution. montagne keeps it good enough as a diversionary time killer, but it's just too bad it never was convincing."


== remake ==
it is remade in india in several regional languages, in 1988 it is made in tamil as dilli baabu, in 1992 popular director david dhawan made bol radha bol and in 2017 in telugu goutham nanda.all were blockbuster hits during there releases,while all were unofficial remakes.


== references ==


== external links ==
the man with my face at imdb
the man with my face at allmovie
the man with my face at the tcm movie database
'the man with my face film scene at veoh