the package is a 1989 american political thriller film directed by andrew davis and starring gene hackman, joanna cassidy, tommy lee jones, john heard, and dennis franz.
set during the cold war, the film depicts the u.s. and soviet governments as they are about to sign a disarmament treaty to completely eliminate nuclear weapons. however, elements within each country's military are vehemently opposed to such a plan, and determined to stop it at all costs.
roger ebert awarded the film three stars out of four, calling it "smarter than most thrillers".


== plot ==
gene hackman stars as johnny gallagher, a united states army special forces master sergeant who is assigned to escort a prisoner, an army deserter named thomas boyette (tommy lee jones), from west berlin back to the united states. when boyette escapes, gallagher pursues him and discovers that boyette is actually a professional assassin hired to kill the leader of the soviet union (clearly resembling mikhail gorbachev) after a meeting in chicago with the president of the united states. gallagher is joined by his ex-wife eileen (joanna cassidy), a lieutenant colonel in the judge advocate general corps of the u.s. army, and chicago police lt. milan delich (dennis franz) with whom sgt. gallagher served in vietnam. sergeant gallagher is later confined to the base. later, when one of his ex-wife's people is killed and fearing that she's in danger, the sergeant escapes and saves her just as some people are trying to kill her. the sergeant and his ex-wife  learn that something is happening in chicago. they travel to the city and sergeant gallagher asks a cop he knows to help him. sergeant gallagher finds out that disarmament talks are taking place in chicago.


== cast ==
gene hackman as master sergeant johnny gallagher
joanna cassidy as lieutenant colonel eileen gallagher
tommy lee jones as thomas boyette
john heard as colonel glen whitacre
dennis franz as detective lieutenant milan delich. chicago police.
pam grier as lieutenant ruth butler
kevin crowley as segreant walter henke
ron dean as karl richards
nathan davis as the soviet press secretary
chelcie ross as lieutenant general tom hopkins
thalmus rasulala  as, secret service commander
gregory alan williams as colonel woods
joe v.greco as general carlson
reni santoni as a chicago police lieutenant
marco st. john as master sergeant  marth
boris leskin as soviet foreign minister
gene barge as secret service agent
danny goldring as tony maruss, undercover bum
ike pappas as himself
harry lennix as segreant thompson, johnny's field soldier
nicholas kusenko as general carlson's aide
joe guzaldo as rogers, white house press secretary


== production notes ==
although the story takes place in germany, washington, d.c., arlington, virginia, and chicago, the film was shot entirely in chicago and at the soviet war memorial in tiergarten, berlin.


== reception ==
the package holds a 60% rating on rotten tomatoes, based on 15 reviews.


== home video ==
the film was first released on vhs by orion home video in 1989. it was re-released by mgm home entertainment in 1999, under the mgm movie time series. the film was released on dvd on january 18, 2000.


== references ==


== external links ==
the package at imdb
the package at rotten tomatoes
the package at box office mojo
the package at the american film institute catalog