the hiding place is a 1975 film based on the autobiographical book of the same name by corrie ten boom that recounts her and her family's experiences before and during their imprisonment in a nazi concentration camp during the holocaust during world war ii.
the film was directed by james f. collier. jeanette clift george received a golden globe nomination for most promising newcomer - female. the film was given limited release in its day and featured the last appearance from arthur o'connell.


== plot ==
as the nazis invade the netherlands in 1940, corrie (jeannette clift george) and the rest of her family allow jews to hide in a part of their home that is specially remodeled by members of the dutch resistance. however, the nazis eventually discover that the family is hiding jews, and on february 28, 1944, the entire family and its friends are arrested after their betrayal by a dutch collaborator. the hidden jews are never found by authorities.
corrie's father, casper, dies before he reaches the concentration camp, and corrie worries that she will never see her home again. the nazis send corrie and her sister, betsie (julie harris), to the ravensbrck concentration camp, germany, for hiding jews in their home. at the concentration camp, betsie encourages corrie to remain hopeful that god will rescue them from the brutalities they experience.
with little food and constant work, the women suffer constantly, and betsie dies. ultimately, corrie leaves the camp in december 1944 through what is discovered years later to have been a clerical error, as everyone else in her group of prisoners was gassed the next month (january 1945). her life after the ordeal was dedicated to showing that jesus' love is greater than the deepest pit into which humankind finds itself.


== cast ==
jeannette clift as corrie ten boom
julie harris as betsie ten boom
arthur o'connell as casper ten boom, 'papa'
robert rietti as willem ten boom
pamela sholto as tine
paul henley as peter ten boom
richard wren as kik ten boom
broes hartman as dutch policeman
lex van delden as young german officer
tom van beek as dr. heemstra
nigel hawthorne as pastor de ruiter
john gabriel as professor zeiner
edward burnham as underground leader
cyril shaps as building inspector smit
forbes collins as mason smit
eileen heckart as	katje


== see also ==
list of american films of 1975
list of holocaust films


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
corrie ten boom impacts new generation at billygraham.org
the hiding place at imdb 
the hiding place at allmovie