the blood of fu manchu, also known as fu manchu and the kiss of death, kiss of death, kiss and kill (u.s. title) and against all odds (original u.s. video title),  is a 1968 british adventure crime film directed by jess franco, based on the fictional asian villain dr. fu manchu created by sax rohmer. it was the fourth film in a series, and was preceded by the vengeance of fu manchu. the castle of fu manchu followed in 1969.
it was produced by harry alan towers for udastex films. it starred christopher lee as dr. fu manchu, richard greene as scotland yard detective nayland smith, and howard marion-crawford as dr. petrie. the film was filmed in spain and brazil. shirley eaton appears in a scene that she claimed she was never paid for; apparently, the director jess franco had inserted some stock footage of her from one of her films (the girl from rio (1968)) into the film without telling her. she only found out years later that she had been in a fu manchu film.


== plot ==
in his remote jungle hideout, the evil dr. fu manchu has discovered a deadly venom in a "lost city" in the amazonian jungle that affects only men. women can become carriers of the "kiss of death" by being bitten by venomous snakes. the venom causes blindness and is ultimately followed six weeks later by death. using mind control, he aims six women at nayland smith and other key people with political influence. this prevents them from interfering with his own ambitions: to prepare millions of "doses" and spread them around the world's major cities and capitals in a plan to gain world domination.


== cast ==
christopher lee as dr. fu manchu
richard greene as nayland smith
howard marion-crawford as dr. petrie
gtz george as carl jansen
maria rohm as ursula wagner
ricardo palacios as sancho lopez
loni von friedl as celeste
frances khan as carmen
tsai chin as lin tang
isaura de oliveira as yuma
shirley eaton as the black widow
francesca tu as lotus


== external links ==
the blood of fu manchu at imdb
kiss and kill at the tcm movie database
the blood of fu manchu at allmovie