the captain hates the sea is a 1934 comedy film directed by lewis milestone and released by columbia pictures. the film, which involves a grand hotel-style series of intertwining stories involving the passengers on a cruise ship, is notable as the last feature film of silent film icon john gilbert and the first columbia feature to include the three stooges (curly howard, moe howard and larry fine) in the cast, cast as the ship's orchestra.  the film also stars victor mclaglen, arthur treacher, akim tamiroff, leon errol and walter connolly.


== plot ==
alcoholic newspaperman steve bramley boards the ship san capador for a restful cruise, hoping to quit drinking and begin writing a book. also on board are steve's friend schulte, a private detective hoping to nab criminal danny checkett with a fortune in stolen bonds. steve begins drinking, all the while observing the various stories of other passengers on board, several of whom turn out not to be who they seem to be.


== cast ==
victor mclaglen - junius p. schulte
wynne gibson - mrs. jeddock
alison skipworth - mrs. yolanda magruder
john gilbert - steve bramley
helen vinson - janet grayson
fred keating - danny checkett
leon errol - layton
walter connolly - captain helquist
tala birell - gerta klangi
walter catlett - joe silvers
donald meek - josephus bushmills


== production ==
during production, the film went over budget due in large part to the alcohol-fueled partying by gilbert, mclaglen, errol, catlett and connolly. harry cohn, the head of columbia, became alarmed and sent a cable to lewis milestone that read: "hurry up! the cost is staggering!" milestone, in turn, sent a cable to cohn that read: "so is the cast!"the exterior footage of the san capeador (filmed at san pedro harbor) would be recycled in the three stooges' short dunked in the deep.a dvd of the captain hates the sea was released on august 2, 2011 by sony and is available at shop.tcm.com .


== references ==


== external links ==
the captain hates the sea at imdb
the captain hates the sea at allmovie
the captain hates the sea at the tcm movie database
the captain hates the sea at the american film institute catalog