the werewolf of washington is a 1973 horror comedy film written and directed by milton moses ginsberg and starring dean stockwell.  produced by nina schulman, it satirizes several individuals in the richard nixon presidency.


== plot summary ==
jack whittier (dean stockwell) is the press secretary for the white house and for the president of the united states, while on assignment in hungary, he is bitten by a wolf who actually turns out to be a man; when jack tries to report it, he believes it is the work of communists. he then meets a gypsy woman who tells him it was her son and he needed to die to be saved. she then gives him a charm and tells him to be careful now that he may suffer the same effects.
when he returns to washington d.c., he is assigned to the president (biff mcguire); he is also been having an affair with the president's daughter marion (jane house). jack suddenly starts to feel different changes about him whenever the moon is full. numerous murders suddenly occur all over washington, all related to the president's staff. jack is now convinced that he is a werewolf; when he tries to explain this to his superior, commander salmon  (beeson carroll), he does not believe him; jack then presents a pattern of where the murders have happened in the shape of a pentagram; he convinces him to lock him in his apartment and restrain him and also to be documented. the president needs jack for a special interview with the chinese prime minister, however, jack starts to change into a werewolf and he attacks the president.
he then leaves for marion, who then shoots him with a silver bullet, thus killing him and changing him back to his human form. many witnesses decide to cover up the act saying jack bravely came into the line of fire.
in audio over the closing credits, the president addresses the nation. at the very end, he starts to change into a werewolf.


== cast ==
dean stockwell  ...  jack whittier  
katalin kallay  ...  giselle  henry ferrentino  ...  beal  despo diamantidou  ...  gypsy woman thayer david  ...  inspector  nancy andrews  ...  mrs. margie captree  clifton james  ...  attorney general  biff mcguire  ...  president  
jack waltzer  ...  appointments secretary  
ben yaffee  ...  mr. captree  
jane house  ...  marion  
beeson carroll  ...  commander salmon michael dunn  ...  dr. kiss
harry stockwell  ... military #2


== release ==
the film was originally released theatrically in the united states by diplomat in 1973.
on vhs and dvd, the film has been released by various labels over the years with questionable legitimacy to the rights and subpar presentations. now it has taken another release on dvd as part of the elvira "movie macabre" series, hosted by elvira, played by cassandra peterson.


== see also ==
list of american films of 1973


== references ==


== external links ==
the werewolf of washington at imdb
the werewolf of washington is available for free download at the internet archive
the werewolf of washington at allmovie
the werewolf of washington at google videos
the werewolf of washington in elvira movie macabre app