the green pastures is a 1936 american film depicting stories from the bible as visualized by black characters. it starred rex ingram (in several roles, including "de lawd"), oscar polk, and eddie "rochester" anderson. it was based on the 1928 novel ol' man adam an' his chillun by roark bradford and the 1930 pulitzer prize-winning play of the same name by marc connelly.
the green pastures was one of only six feature films in the hollywood studio era to feature an all-black cast, though elements of it were criticised by civil rights activists at the time and subsequently.


== plot summary ==
god tests the human race in this reenactment of bible stories set in the world of black american folklore.


== cast ==
rex ingram as de lawd / adam / hezdrel
oscar polk as gabriel
eddie "rochester" anderson as noah
frank wilson as moses
george h. reed as mr. deshee / aaron
abraham gleaves as archangel
myrtle anderson as eve
al stokes as cain
edna mae harris as zeba
james fuller as cain the sixth
george randol as high priest
ida forsyne as noah's wife
ray martin as shem
charles andrews as flatfoot
dudley dickerson as ham
jimmy burress as japheth
billy cumby as abraham / head magician / king of babylon
ivory williams as jacob
david bethea as aaron
ernest whitman as pharaoh
reginald fenderson as joshua
slim thompson as master of ceremonies
clinton rosemond as prophet
hall johnson choir as vocal ensemble
willie best as henry - the angel (uncredited)
jesse graves as general (uncredited)
clarence muse as angel (uncredited)
fred toones as zubo (uncredited)


== reception ==
despite criticisms about its racial stereotyping, the green pastures proved to be an enormously popular film. on its opening day at new york's radio city music hall, tickets sold at a rate of 6,000 per hour. the film was held over for an entire year's run at some theaters. it remained the highest-grossing all-black-cast film until the release of carmen jones in 1954.
writing for the spectator in 1936, graham greene gave the film a generally good review, speculating that audiences "will find [it] continuously entertaining, if only intermittently moving". greene praised director connelly in particular, describing scenes of "excellent" melodrama, his "ingenious [use of] pathos", and the "admirable" restraint evident in the simplicity of the settings. 
greene's only complaints about the film was that "one may feel uneasy at mr. connelly's humour" and his depiction of "the negro mind". greene noted that "the  result is occasionally patronising, too often quaint, and at the close of the film definitely false", but ultimately he concludes that the film is "as good a religious play as one is likely to get in this age from a practiced new york writer".


== references ==


== external links ==
the green pastures at the tcm movie database
the green pastures at imdb
the green pastures at allmovie
the green pastures at the american film institute catalog