aval (transl.her) in tamil,  gruham (transl.home) in telugu, and the house next door in hindi, is a 2017 indian horror film co-written and directed by milind rau. shot simultaneously in the three languages, the film stars siddharth and andrea jeremiah in lead roles, with siddharth also working on the film as a co-producer and a co-writer. the film was released on 3 november 2017 to mostly positive reviews in all languages and became a success.the satellite rights of the film is sold to colors tamil.


== plot ==
the movie starts with a series of incidents of a happy life of mom and a daughter back in 1934. at present dr. krishna / krish (siddharth), a successful brain surgeon, and his wife lakshmi (andrea jeremiah) live peacefully in their beautiful house under the mountains. their perfect life together is now disturbed after a family moves into the house next door where the mother and the daughter lived in 1934.
jennifer (anisha angelina victor) is a troubled teenager and neighbour of krish and lakshmi. losing her mother at the young age, she has turned out to be a rebel. while she doesn't despise her caring stepmother, she never misses a chance to throw tantrums at her either. but, she loves her halfsister sara. 
jennifer's rebellious nature makes her do things like smoking for example. during one such time when she sneaks out of the house for a smoke, she picks up some belongings of a dead person. jenny starts to act weird soon her family moves in the house. so, jenny's father paul (atul kulkarni) with krish's recommendation contacts dr prasad (suresh).  and a series of paranormal incidents abound that affects the lives of the people around her. jennifer's new house is haunted by three ancient chinese spirits, and one of them is a man and he is bloodthirsty while the other two spirits are the mom and the daughter who helps the family to get out of the house without trouble. aval is not just a conventional humans vs devil narration. it has an angle of good spirits vs bad spirits and how the living suffer as they are jammed between this supernatural tug-of-war.


== cast ==
siddharth as dr. krishnakanth "krish"
andrea jeremiah as lakshmi
anisha angelina victor as jennifer "jenny"
atul kulkarni as paul
suresh as dr. prasad
avinash raghudevan as psychic
prakash belawadi as pastor joshua
bhawana aneja as lizzy
deeraj vaidy as krish's friend
khushi hajare as sarah


== production ==
the film was planned by siddharth in june 2016, who revealed that he would work on a horror film alongside actress andrea jeremiah to be directed by milind rau, who had earlier made the unreleased kadhal 2 kalyanam. the title of the film was said to be the house next door, and the film was subsequently shot simultaneously in three languages. the principal photography of the film commenced in august 2016.
in october 2016, andrea jeremiah revealed that the shoot of the film was over.


== music ==
hindi tracklist"o mere sanam" - benny dayal
"ye waqt maut ka hai" - suraj jagan, shilpa natarajantelugu tracklist"kaatukka kanne" - sathyaprakash, chinmayi
"yevadura" - shilpa natrajan, mark thomas
"xiao xiao ma" - chen-yu maglin, poorna m


== see also ==
list of hindi horror films


== references ==


== external links ==
aval at imdb
bbc india's music review of the hindi-language album