the punch and judy man is a 1963 black and white british comedy film made by elstree studios directed by jeremy summers from a script by philip oakes and tony hancock for the associated british picture corporation. it was hancock's second and last starring role in a film, following the rebel (1961).


== plot ==
wally pinner is a punch and judy man working on the beach in the (fictional) seaside town of piltdown. he works with his assistant (hugh lloyd) who also makes and repairs the puppets.
wally and the other individuals who have beach businesses, including the sandman (john le mesurier) who makes sand sculptures and neville the photographer (mario fabrizi), are a friendly community of people who pride themselves on their independence. 
wally's wife, delia (sylvia syms), runs a seaside curios shop below their flat, and is socially ambitious for herself and also for wally, despite his reluctance. to achieve this, she makes moves to have wally invited to entertain at the official reception for lady jane caterham (barbara murray), who is to switch on the town's illuminations, and at the mayoress's suggestion the reception committee invites wally to entertain. although their marriage is lacking in passion, wally wants to please his wife and eventually agrees to do it.
the illumination ceremony ends in farce when wally's electric shaver leads to a disruption of the power, resulting in some of the illuminated signs displaying unflattering comments about the town. wally then puts on his show for the guests at the formal dinner and dance, but a drunken guest heckles punch and disrupts the performance, leading to a food fight involving all the guests. lady jane's attempt to leave is blocked and she gets into an argument with wally, during which she insults and slaps delia who responds by flooring her with a punch, to the horror of the mayor and mayoress. 
the next morning delia has a black eye: her dreams of social acceptance have vanished, but wally and delia are now closer, and happily decide to leave piltdown for pastures new.


== cast ==
tony hancock  wally pinner
sylvia syms  delia pinner, wally's wife
ronald fraser  mayor
barbara murray  lady caterham
john le mesurier  charles arthur ford, the sandman
hugh lloyd  edward cox, wally's assistant
norman bird  council committee man
kevin brennan  landlord
eddie byrne  ice cream assistant
mario fabrizi  nevile shanks
nicholas webb  peter
brian bedford - lady caterham's 1st escort
peter myers - lady caterham's 2nd escort
peter vaughan  council committee man
norman chappell  footman
gerald harper  first drunk
walter hudd  clergyman
hattie jacques  dolly zarathusa, the fortune teller
michael ripper  waiter
russell waters  bobby bachelor the band leader
carole ann ford  girl in seaside kiosk
gerald harper - as man dining at the function (uncredited)


== background ==
the town of piltdown is apparently named after piltdown man.
the film is a gentle but bitter-sweet comedy. the screenplay by hancock and philip oakes appears to be based partly on hancock's own life and first marriage. in an early scene, wally and delia have breakfast in almost total silence, and the scene demonstrates that they are married from habit, and no longer have anything in common.
in the following scene, wally angrily rams a bunch of flowers up a porcelain pig's backside. the flowers were first intended to go up the pig's nose, but hancock argued that the joke had to be stronger and so a prop with a suitable orifice was made. delia later discovers the flower-abused pig in a socially awkward situation. the beginning of this scene was cut from the dvd and from many television versions (though a still survives), leaving only the moment when delia finds the flowers. the uncut version has been shown on talking pictures tv.
in another scene, wally retreats from the rain into an ice cream parlour with a small boy, played by sylvia syms' nephew, nicholas webb. the boy asks for a large sundae (a "piltdown glory") and wally orders the same. then, because he is uncertain of the correct technique for eating the dessert, wally carefully watches the boy and imitates his every move. the scene was completed from several different takes, between which hancock would wash away the taste of the ice cream with vodka as he much disliked the taste of the dessert. the scene was originally supposed to be done in a shorter time frame, but hancock believed that drawing it out as long as it did would work better, and ultimately hold more impact and humour for the viewers.
several actors from hancock's earlier television series hancock's half hour also appear in supporting roles: john le mesurier, hugh lloyd, mario fabrizi and (briefly) hattie jacques. syms was cast as delia after billie whitelaw withdrew. roger wilmut, in tony hancock: artiste (1978), argues that the climactic food fight escalates too quickly and that a more experienced director would have given it more time to develop comedically.
the film itself was partly shot on location in bognor regis, and when the producers asked for some local people to take parts as extras, over 2,000 people turned up. many parts of the town are shown in the film; the pier and the town hall feature alongside other areas such as spencer street, belmont street, and york road, beside the esplanade and royal hotel, where the film crew stayed. tony hancock himself stayed at the more expensive and smarter royal norfolk hotel during filming.


== external links ==
the punch and judy man at imdb