the village is a 2004 american period horror thriller film written, produced, and directed by m. night shyamalan. it stars bryce dallas howard, joaquin phoenix, adrien brody, william hurt, sigourney weaver, and brendan gleeson. the film is about a village whose population lives in fear of creatures inhabiting the woods beyond it, referred to as "those we don't speak of".
the film received mixed reviews, with many critics expressing disappointment with the twist ending.  the film gave composer james newton howard his fourth oscar nomination for best original score. the film was a financial success as it grossed $257 million worldwide against a $60 million production budget.


== plot ==
residents of the small, isolated, 19th-century pennsylvania village of covington have constructed a large barrier of oil lanterns and watchtowers to protect themselves from "those we don't speak of", nameless humanoid creatures living within the surrounding woods. the creatures, as only known to chief elder edward walker and his blind daughter ivy elizabeth walker, are actually members of their own community wearing costumes and have continued the legend of monsters to deter others from leaving the village. lucius hunt heads into the woods to get to the towns for medical supplies, despite receiving no sanctions to do so from the village elders. 
ivy and lucius both have affections for each other and plan to marry. after lucius is stabbed by noah percy, a young man with an apparent developmental disability also in love with ivy, edward sends ivy and two young men into the woods for medicine. the men abandon ivy almost immediately, fearful of the creatures. she travels through the forest before being suddenly attacked by a creature, which she tricks into falling into a deep hole. the creature is actually noah wearing one of the costumes, which he discovered under the floorboards of the room where he had been confined after stabbing lucius. ivy eventually gets to the far edge of the woods and climbs over a high, ivy-covered wall. a young park ranger named kevin spots ivy and is shocked to hear that she has come out of the woods. 
ivy finds out the truth about the woods. they are actually the walker wildlife preserve, named for ivy's family, and that it is the early 21st century instead of the 19th century. edward walker, professor of american history at the university of pennsylvania, constructed covington in the middle of the preserve in the 1970s, using money inherited from his family, for grief counseling clinic patients whose loved ones died from crimes. to protect them from the outside world, he paid the government a funded a ranger corps. ivy returns to the village with medicine supplied by kevin and is left unaware of the truth. during her absence, the elders secretly open their black boxes, each containing mementos from their lives in the outside world, including items related to their past traumas. the elders gather around lucius's bed when they hear that ivy has returned and that she killed one of the monsters. according to edward, noah's death will allow them to continue deceiving the rest of the villagers that there are creatures in the woods.


== cast ==


== production ==
the film was originally titled the woods, but the name was changed because a film in production by director lucky mckee, the woods (2006), already had that title. like other shyamalan productions, this film had high levels of secrecy surrounding it, to protect the expected twist ending that was a known shyamalan trademark. despite that, the script was stolen over a year before the film was released, prompting many "pre-reviews" of the film on several internet film sites and much fan speculation about plot details. 
the village seen in the film was built in its entirety in one field outside chadds ford, pennsylvania. an adjacent field contained an on-location temporary sound stage. production on the film started in october 2003, with delays because some scenes needing fall foliage could not be shot because of a late fall season. principal photography was wrapped up in mid-december of that year. in april and may 2004, several of the lead actors were called back to the set. reports noted that this seemed to have something to do with a change to the film's ending, and, in fact, the film's final ending differs from the ending in a stolen version of the script that surfaced a year earlier; the script version ends after ivy climbs over the wall and gets help from a truck driver, while the film version has ivy meeting a park ranger and scenes where she returns to the village.


== music ==


=== soundtrack ===
the film's score was composed by james newton howard, and features solo violinist hilary hahn. the film was nominated for the academy award for best original score, but lost to finding neverland.

track listing"noah visits"
"what are you asking me?"
"the bad color"
"those we don't speak of"
"will you help me?"
"i cannot see his color"
"rituals"
"the gravel road"
"race to resting rock"
"the forbidden line"
"the vote"
"it is not real"
"the shed not to be used"


== release ==


=== box office ===
the film grossed $114 million in the u.s., and $142 million in international markets. its worldwide box office totalled $256 million, the tenth highest grossing pg-13 movie of 2004.


=== reception ===
on rotten tomatoes, a review aggregator website, the film has an approval rating of 43% based on 218 reviews and an average rating of 5.39/10. the site's critics' consensus reads, "the village is appropriately creepy, but shyamalan's signature twist ending disappoints." at metacritic, the film holds a score of 44 out of 100 based on 40 reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews". audiences surveyed by cinemascore gave the film a grade "c" on scale of a+ to f.roger ebert gave the film one star and wrote: "the village is a colossal miscalculation, a movie based on a premise that cannot support it, a premise so transparent it would be laughable were the movie not so deadly solemn ... to call the ending an anticlimax would be an insult not only to climaxes but to prefixes. it's a crummy secret, about one step up the ladder of narrative originality from it was all a dream. it's so witless, in fact, that when we do discover the secret, we want to rewind the film so we don't know the secret anymore." ebert named the film the tenth worst film of 2004 and subsequently put it on his "most hated" list. there were also comments that the film, while raising questions about conformity in a time of "evil," did little to "confront" those themes. slate's michael agger commented that shyamalan was continuing in a pattern of making "sealed-off movies that [fall] apart when exposed to outside logic."the movie had a number of admirers. critic jeffrey westhoff commented that though the film had its shortcomings, these did not necessarily render it a bad movie, and that "shyamalan's orchestration of mood and terror is as adroit as ever". philip horne of the daily telegraph in a later review noted "this exquisitely crafted allegory of american soul-searching seems to have been widely misunderstood".


==== retrospective reviews ====
the film has attracted retrospective reviews.  emily vanderwerff of vox said, "[the film] may be [shyamalan's] best film, and one of the most interesting looks at the american film industry's early attempts to incorporate the iraq war into fictional contexts. it's been unjustly derided, and now is as good a time as any to change that." she went on to praise the twist ending, the possible connections between the plot and the iraq war, and the technical aspects, including the cinematography. adam chitwood of collider praised the ending, the performances of howard, phoenix, and hurt, and the cinematography. he also went on to say, "[the film] shines when it digs into themes of humanity's relationship with sorrow, and whether pain and violence can be excised from our lives or if we're destined to fall prey to harmful sins. devoid of expectations, [the film] holds up far better than you may remember." chris evangelista of slashfilm called it, "one of shyamalan's most interesting films, and perhaps one of his best. a melancholy meditation on grief and fear, [because] it radiates sorrow in ways his other films do not. yes, it does have that expected shyamalan twist  two of them, in fact. but the film is more than its twists, and deserves to be watched with fresh eyes." kayleigh donaldson of syfy wire praised the cinematography, and said, "...[the film] stands as one of the strongest representations of shyamalans ethos, for better or worse." carlos morales of ign argued that the film was misunderstood at the time of its release because it was mismarketed as a horror film, and also because of audience expectations that had been built up by shyamalan's three previous films. "the real twist was that the movie they wanted wasn't the one shyamalan made."


=== accolades ===
2005 ascap film and television music awardswon  top box office film  james newton howard2004 academy awards (oscars)nominated  best original score  james newton howard2005 10th empire awardsnominated  best actress  bryce dallas howard
nominated  best newcomer  bryce dallas howard
nominated  best director  m. night shyamalan2005 evening standard british film awardswon  best technical/artistic achievement  roger deakins2005 mtv movie awardsnominated  best breakthrough female performance  bryce dallas howard2005 motion picture sound editors (golden reel award)nominated  best sound editing in a feature: music, feature film  thomas s. drescher2004 online film critics society awardsnominated  best breakthrough performance  bryce dallas howard2005 teen choice awardsnominated  choice movie scary scene  bryce dallas howard, ivy walker waits at the door for lucius hunt.
nominated  choice movie: thriller


==== other honors ====
the film is recognized by american film institute in these lists:

2005: afi's 100 years of film scores  nominatedthe soundtrack was widely praised, and was nominated by the american film institute as one of the best film scores and the academy award for best original score.


=== plagiarism allegation ===
simon & schuster, publishers of the 1995 young adult book running out of time by margaret peterson haddix, claimed that the film had taken ideas from the book. the book had a plot which features a village whose inhabitants are secretly forced to live in the 1830s when the year is actually 1996. the plot of shyamalan's movie had several similarities to the book. they both involve a village, which is actually a park in the present day (shyamalan uses a late nineteenth-century village), have young heroines on a search for medical supplies, and both have adult leaders bent on keeping the children in their village from discovering the truth. in haddix's novel, the truth is that the village is a tourist attraction and involuntary science experiment; in the movie, that the adults had decided to withdraw from the outside world.
no lawsuit was ever filed over the similarity.


=== home media ===
the film was released on vhs and dvd on january 11, 2005. this is currently the only m. night shyamalan film that does not have a blu-ray version. the village was also the last shyamalan film to be released on vhs.


== references ==


== external links ==
the village at imdb
the village at allmovie
the village at rotten tomatoes
american cinematographer magazine, august 2004. interview with roger deakins on the village's cinematography.
"disney and shyamalan in your back yard"  website by a local resident describing the filming of the village in chadds ford, pennsylvania.
the woods unspecified draft script for the village