the girl from petrovka is a 1974 american comedy-drama film starring goldie hawn and hal holbrook, based on the novel by george feifer. it is about an american journalist, joe (holbrook) who goes to the soviet union and meets  oktyabrina (hawn), an undocumented ballet dancer, which attracts the attention of the authorities.


== plot ==
joe (hal holbrook) is a cynical american journalist assigned to work in the soviet union, where he meets oktyabrina (goldie hawn), a spirited and erratic russian ballet dancer who lives illegally without proper documents. their ensuing romance opens new possibilities for both; but also draws the attention of the soviet authorities.


== cast ==
goldie hawn as oktyabrina
hal holbrook as joe
anthony hopkins as kostya
grgoire aslan as minister
anton dolin as ignatievitch
bruno wintzell as alexander
zoran andric as leonid
hanna hertelendy as judge
maria sukolov as old crone
zitto kazann as passport black marketeer
inger jensen as helga van dam
raymond o'keefe as minister's driver
richard marner as kremlin press official
michael janisch as police chief valinikov
harry towb as american reporter


== production ==
some filming was originally planned to take place in belgrade, yugoslavia, but yugoslavia's inex films canceled its contract with universal pictures for undisclosed reasons just two weeks before shooting was set to begin, and production had to be moved to vienna. director robert ellis miller suspected that inex's decision was made under pressure from moscow. a yugoslavian official denied this, but did reveal that inex was fearful of offending russia with the film.


== reception ==
nora sayre of the new york times wrote that "goldie hawn can't play a russian" and hal holbrook "has little to do beyond shaking his head when he thinks of her smiling indulgently when he looks at her ... certainly, neither performer has been aided by the script." arthur d. murphy of variety wrote, "what 25 years of cold war 'comedy' cliche and the latterday nixon detente haven't done to make irrelevant 'the girl from petrovoka,' artless writing and direction have. this sixth richard d. zanuck-david brown production for universal stars goldie hawn, ineffective as a ponderous russian version of a free spirit, and hal holbrook, who cannot alone make work such sterile and conrball comedy-dramaturgy." gene siskel of the chicago tribune gave the film 1.5 stars out of 4. he called the story "insipid" and wrote of goldie hawn that "there is no way she can handle a russian accent. her dialect floats from the volga to the mississippi during a single sentence."


== see also ==
list of american films of 1974


== references ==


== external links ==
the girl from petrovka at imdb
the girl from petrovka at allmovie
the girl from petrovka at rotten tomatoes