for the 1998 british romantic comedy, see martha, meet frank, daniel and laurence.

the very thought of you is a 1944 romantic drama film directed by delmer daves and starring dennis morgan, eleanor parker and dane clark. the screenplay concerns an american soldier on a short leave during world war ii who falls in love with and marries a woman.


== plot ==
away for a year and a half serving their country, army sergeants dave (dennis morgan) and "fixit" (dane clark) spend a three-day pass in pasadena, also visiting dave's alma mater, caltech.
they meet two young women who work in a parachute factory. cora (faye emerson) quickly catches fixit's eye, while janet (eleanor parker) remembers dave from school days. upon realizing that dave has no family nearby, janet invites him home for thanksgiving dinner.
her family does not treat him kindly. janet's mother does not approve of getting involved with a military man who's away all the time. one reason for that is janet's sister molly (andrea king), who is married to a sailor but seeing other men behind his back. janet's brother, classified 4-f, is rude to dave as well. only her father and younger sister ellie makes their dinner guest feel welcome.  ellie notices the attraction between janet and dave and secretly arranges a date on thanksgiving morning between dave and janet.
after a day at mount wilson runs long and causes them to be late getting janet back home, but the couple can't bear to part, so janet and dave proceed to cora's apartment and fall asleep. it is 3 a.m. when he takes her home, where janet's mother slaps her.
dave must report for duty in san diego, but is in love and marries janet, enjoying a brief honeymoon. molly disapproves and intercepts dave's letters to janet.
janet decides to move out and live in cora's apartment.  
she and dave (with fixit's help) have a quick rendezvous in san diego, sleeping on a beach, because all the hotels and trailer parks are full.  shortly after this, janet learns she's pregnant, which leads to more acrimony between her and molly.  
when news comes that dave and fixit have been wounded in the war, everyone in janet's family finally relents. molly even begs husband fred (william prince) for forgiveness and they reconcile. it takes months more, but dave finally returns to rejoin his wife and meet their new baby boy.


== cast ==
dennis morgan as sergeant david stewart
eleanor parker as janet wheeler
dane clark as sergeant "fixit" gilman
faye emerson as cora colton
beulah bondi as harriet wheeler
henry travers as pop wheeler
william prince as fred
andrea king as molly wheeler
john alvin as cal wheeler
marianne o'brien as bernice
georgia lee settle as ellie wheeler
richard erdman as soda jerk


== reception ==
according to warner bros records the film earned $1,933,000 domestically and $581,000 foreign.


== references ==


== external links ==
the very thought of you at the tcm movie database
the very thought of you at imdb
video clips from the very thought of you on youtube
the very thought of you at allmovie
the very thought of you at the american film institute catalog