the undying monster, also known as the hammond mystery, is a 1942 american mystery horror film directed by john brahm and written by lillie hayward and michel jacoby, based on jessie douglas kerruish's 1922 novel of the same name. the film stars james ellison, heather angel and john howard, and focuses on a series of mysterious deaths within the wealthy hammond family.


== plot ==
the hammond family has been cursed since the crusades, with family members dying or committing suicide under mysterious circumstances.  when two people, including oliver hammond, are attacked by an unknown creature, a scotland yard scientist, robert curtis, and his sidekick christy are dispatched to investigate.  although the local townspeople are convinced that the attacks are the result of the hammond family curse, curtis seeks a more scientific explanation.
curtis' investigation at the hammond household reveals a number of unusual circumstances, including slamming doors and clanking chains, a recently entered secret room supposedly locked for years, and a statue of a strange dog-like creature in the hammond family crypt.  during his investigation, one of the initial victims of the attack dies (after being in a coma), and the case is sent to a coroner's jury for judgement.  upon hearing testimony from members of the hammond family and their associates, the jury rules that the victim died at the hand of an unknown person or creature of unknown species.
after the ruling, curtis looks for evidence upon the victim's body.  he finds a hair that he later identifies as a wolf's, but the hair disappears mysteriously soon after he analyzes it.  the monster attacks again, this time kidnapping helga hammond, but curtis and the police chase him down.  when shot, the monster transforms into oliver hammond.  afterwards, dr. jeff colbert, a friend of the hammonds, reveals that they have been afflicted with lycanthropy for generations  that is, they are werewolves  and he had been attempting to cure them of the disease.


== cast ==
james ellison as robert curtis
heather angel as helga hammond
john howard as oliver hammond
bramwell fletcher as dr. jeff colbert
heather thatcher as christy
aubrey mather as inspector craig
halliwell hobbes as walton the butler


== reception ==
modern response for the undying monster has been mixed to positive.
film critic leonard maltin awarded the film two and a half out of four stars, commending the film's atmospheric photography while also stating that it added nothing new to the genre. dennis schwartz of ozus' world movie reviews gave the film an a-, praising the film for its atmosphere, cinematography, and suspense, calling it "[a] superior telling of a werewolf". schwartz's only criticism was directed towards the film's comedy relief, which he felt was unnecessary. time out magazine commended the film's atmosphere, cinematography, performances, and direction, while also criticizing the film's plot. chris coffel from dread central offered the film similar praise, while also commending the film's mystery aspects and plot, favorably comparing it to universal horror films.alternately, stuart galbraith iv from dvd talk stated that, while it featured great atmosphere, and was well-made and directed, overall the film was "disappointing" due to its less than stellar cast and illogical plot twist. michael barrett of popmatters rated the film a mixed score of five out of ten stars. in his review, barrett pointed out that the film's title monster as the film's major fault, stating that special effects used to for the monster were ineffective and of poor quality, and the final explanation of the family "curse" was unsatisfactory. tv guide gave the film two out of five stars, stating that while the film contained effectively "eerie atmosphere" and great location work, it was still just a knock off of universal's wolf man.


== references ==


=== citations ===


== sources ==
meehan, paul (2010). horror noir: where cinema's dark sisters meet. mcfarland & company. isbn 978-0-7864-4597-4.


== external links ==
the undying monster at the american film institute catalog
the undying monster at allmovie
the undying monster at imdb
the undying monster at rotten tomatoes
the undying monster at the tcm movie database