the ghoul is a 1975 british tyburn film productions horror film directed by freddie francis and starring peter cushing, john hurt, alexandra bastedo, veronica carlson, gwen watford, don henderson and  ian mcculloch. in the united states, the film was released as night of the ghoul and the thing in the attic.


== plot ==
in 1920s england, a party of friends take part in a motorcar race to land's end. one couple, daphne wells hunter and billy, get lost in a fog and run out of petrol. billy goes to look for a garage, but takes so long that daphne ventures out on her own to find him. she locates a rural manor house run by mr. lawrence, a former clergyman. he receives her kindly and sends his caretaker, tom rawlings, to find billy. tom finds billy asleep in the car, shuts his coat in the door so he cannot get out and pushes the car towards a cliff. billy awakes and tries to get out of the car, but it goes over the cliff, and he is killed, as tom laughs evilly. 
meanwhile, lawrence tells daphne about a trip he took to india with his wife harriet and their son simon. harriet and simon were corrupted by a satanic cult. harriet afterwards committed suicide out of remorse, causing lawrence to lose his faith. 
still waiting for billy, daphne falls asleep in a guest room. seeing this, lawrences indian servant, ayah, lets out a blood-covered man from the attic, who stabs daphne to death. afterwards, ayah ritually cooks daphnes flesh for the man to eat and burns her clothes. 
daphne and billys friends, angela and geoffrey, learn of billy's death from the local police sergeant and set out to find daphne, unaware she is already dead. they too run out of petrol, so geoffrey goes to look for help. angela is abducted by tom, who tries to rape her. when lawrence discovers her presence, he reluctantly decides to use her as another sacrifice to the man in his attic. 
geoffrey returns to the car and finds angela gone. he locates lawrences house and inquires about angela and daphne; lawrence convinces him that they both made it back into town by bus. tom is sent to help geoffrey with his car. seeing this an opportunity, he attempts to drown geoffrey in the bog, but he half-sinks. geoffrey saves tom and orders him to explain himself. tom admits that daphne was fed to something non-human living in lawrences attic. 
geoffrey returns to the house and confronts lawrence, who admits that the man in his attic is simon, who has been a cannibal since his corruption, and ayah is a sacrificial cult member who came from india to prepare his food. lawrence has kept simon alive because he promised harriet he would do so. despite lawrences desperate attempts to stop him, geoffrey goes into the attic to confront simon. geoffrey screams as lawrence listens helplessly; geoffrey staggers out of the attic, revealing he has been stabbed by simon, and falls down the stairs, dying from his wound as lawrence watches helplessly. 
tom sneaks into the guest room where angela is imprisoned and tries again to rape her, but simon enters and stabs him to death. lawrence enters and reluctantly shoots simon dead, saving angela, who flees the house. heartbroken by what he has done, lawrence goes into his chapel room and commits suicide by shooting himself.


== cast ==


== production ==
this was the second film produced by tyburn film productions.[1] it was shot on location at pinewood studios, iver heath, buckinghamshire, england from 4 march 1974. while the film was in production, actor peter cushing went through emotional turmoil: before he signed on to do this film, he lost his beloved wife helen to natural causes, leading him to wish he would die himself and soon. according to co-star veronica carlson, director freddie francis made cushing do multiple takes during the scene where he talks about his love for his late wife. this caused cushing great distress and reduced the widowed actor and some of the crew to tears. cushing played other men who lost family members in other horror films in the 1970s, including the 1972 film asylum and the 1973 film the creeping flesh.


== reception ==
variety praised the "assured acting" and "impressive set decoration" but called the film "far too tame for its own good," with a script that "moves from a to z without generating much excitement and surprise in between." geoff brown of the monthly film bulletin wrote that the revelation of the titular character near the end was "hardly worth the wait," and that "only john hurt injects more than a fraction of life into his character and dialogue."tv guide gave the film two stars out of four, writing that "cushing and other familiar hammer faces give this the old college try, but francis' dull direction--endless shots of henderson's legs creeping down the stairs--makes the cause hopeless."


== references ==


== external links ==
the ghoul at imdb
the ghoul at allmovie