reed morano (born april 15, 1977) is an american cinematographer and director.   morano was the first woman in history to win both the emmy and directors guild award for directing a drama series in the same year for the pilot episode of the handmaid's tale. morano is known for her cinematography on feature films such as frozen river (2008), kill your darlings (2013) and the skeleton twins (2014).
in 2013, morano became the youngest member of the american society of cinematographers at that time, and one of only 14 women in an organization of approximately 345 active members. two years later, she made her directorial debut with her critically acclaimed feature film meadowland. she also directed the first three episodes of hulu's the handmaid's tale, for which she won an emmy award. she also won a directors guild of america award for directing a drama series for the episode "offred" of the handmaid's tale, which makes her the first woman to win the emmy and directors guild award for directing a drama series.


== early life ==
morano was born in omaha, nebraska, one of two children of lyn and winslow mankin. sometime after she moved her with family to minnesota at 8 months old, her parents divorced, and she and her brother, justin (now a professor of climate science at dartmouth college) lived with their mother on long island. after summering on fire island, they moved there year-round when her mother married casey morano. morano acquired two older step-siblings and, later, half-siblings jordan, morgan and ali. the blended family moved to albuquerque, new mexico, when morano was in third grade; they returned to long island three years later, and morano attended beach street middle school in west islip, new york. after further family moves, morano attended high school in hanover, new hampshire.her father, casey, realizing her interest in theater and drama, "gave me a video camera and said, 'youre gonna be the family documentarian.' when it was time to go to college, i was going to apply to boston university for journalism and dad said, 'you love telling stories and taking pictures, why not apply to film school?'"morano subsequently attended new york university and graduated from the tisch school of the arts film and tv program in 2000. she returned to nyu as an adjunct cinematography professor and co-instructed the first advanced television classes offered.


== career ==


=== as a cinematographer ===
morano's cinematography has appeared regularly at the sundance film festival beginning in 2008 with frozen river (credited as reed dawson morano), which won the grand jury prize. the film was also nominated for an independent spirit award for best picture. in 2011, little birds, shot by morano, premiered at sundance as well. the following year, two films shot by morano premiered there: a feature-length documentary about the band lcd soundsystem, shut up and play the hits, and so yong kims for ellen (credited as reed morano walker), starring paul dano.in 2013, kill your darlings, a 35mm period piece about the beat poets, set in 1943, premiered there , and screened as the toronto international film festival and the venice film festival. the inevitable defeat of mister & pete (2013) premiered at sundance as well. and theatrically released;
in 2014, two feature films shot by morano premiered there: the skeleton twins, a dark comedy starring kristen wiig and bill hader, directed by craig johnson, and mark jacksons war story, a dark drama filmed in sicily starring catherine keener and sir ben kingsley.morano also served as director of photography on season one of hbo's drama looking in 2014. and took over as lead dp on vinyl, produced by martin scorsese, terence winter and mick jagger.


=== as a director ===
morano also served as her own director of photography on her directorial debut, the critically acclaimed drama meadowland, starring olivia wilde, luke wilson, giovanni ribisi, elisabeth moss, juno temple and john leguizamo. it premiered in the dramatic competition at the tribeca film festival in april 2015.in 2017, morano directed the first three episodes of the television adaptation of margaret atwood's the handmaid's tale, which was released by the streaming service hulu in april 2017. for her work on the handmaid's tale, she won an emmy award. she also won a directors guild of america award for directing a drama series for the episode "offred" of the handmaid's tale, which makes her the first woman in history to win both the emmy and directors guild award for directing a drama series in the same year.in 2018, morano directed and shot i think we're alone now, a post-apocalyptic drama centering on the companionship between del (peter dinklage) and grace (elle fanning). the film premiered at the 2018 sundance film festival, and was later released to theaters on september 14, 2018.in 2020, morano released her third feature film as director the rhythm section, starring blake lively, jude law and sterling k. brown.


== personal life ==
morano married fellow cinematographer and gaffer matt walker in 2008. they divorced in 2018. they have two sons together. reed lives with her sons in brooklyn, new york. elder son casey played olivia and luke's son in meadowland.


== filmography ==


== videography ==


== accolades and recognition ==
in 2011, morano was honored at the women in film and television international's crystal + lucy awards with the 2011 kodak vision award. the same year, she was named one of variety's 10 cinematographers to watch.  morano has also been featured as one of ioncinema.coms american new wave 25 and one of five innovative cinematographers in icg magazines generation next spotlight.later in 2012, morano's work was featured in indiewires "on the rise '12: 5 cinematographers lighting up screens in recent years." indiewire also featured morano as a heroine of cinema in both 2011 and 2013. in 2012, morano was featured in kodaks long-running onfilm series. the following year, she became the youngest member of the american society of cinematographers, and one of 14 women in an organization of approximately 345 active members.in 2015, morano was named woman of the year at the fusion film festival.in 2017, she won a primetime emmy award for outstanding directing for a drama series for the hulu series the handmaid's tale.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
reed morano at imdb