animal kingdom is an american drama television series developed by jonathan lisco. it is based on the 2010 australian film of the same name by david michd, who is executive producer for the series, alongside liz watts who also produced the movie. ellen barkin portrayed the leading role of janine "smurf" cody in the first four seasons, played by jacki weaver in the 2010 film.
animal kingdom debuted on tnt on june 14, 2016, and was renewed for a second season in july 2016, of thirteen episodes that premiered on may 30, 2017. in july 2017, tnt renewed the series for a third season that debuted on may 29, 2018. in july 2018, tnt renewed the series for a fourth season that premiered on may 28, 2019.in july 2019, tnt renewed the series for a fifth season. in january 2021, ahead of the fifth season premiere, the series was renewed for a sixth and final season. the fifth season is set to premiere on july 11, 2021.


== premise ==
the series follows a 17-year-old boy, who, after the death of his mother, moves in with his estranged relatives, the codys, a criminal family clan governed by matriarch smurf. 


== cast and characters ==

ellen barkin as janine "smurf" cody, the tough matriarch of the family and j's estranged grandmother. smurf is protective of her family and presents a borderline-incestuous love towards them. she later comes down with terminal cancer and plans an elaborate heist to die on her own terms and take at least pope with her. however, it fails and she is shot dead by j, who fulfilled her wish. (seasons 14)
scott speedman as barry "baz" blackwell, smurf's adopted son and leader in the codys' robberies. he later ends up being shot to death by mia for framing smurf. (seasons 13)
shawn hatosy as andrew "pope" cody, the oldest cody son, who is mentally disturbed and considers suicide. he reappears after having served three years in folsom state prison and had an obsessive infatuation with baz's girlfriend catherine. he is attached to catherine's daughter, lena, and takes it upon himself to give her a good life, until he puts her into the foster care system to protect her from her family's criminal lifestyle.
ben robson as craig cody, the middle cody son, who has a predilection for drugs and extremely risky activities.
jake weary as deran cody, the youngest cody son, a former competitive surfer who is gay and owns and operates a bar as a legitimate side business.
finn cole as joshua "j" cody, smurf's grandson who moves in with her and his uncles following the death of his mother, julia, who was pope's twin sister. j is the only one who will challenge smurf and wants to take power over her and her life.
daniella alonso as catherine blackwell, baz's girlfriend, and the mother of their daughter, lena. she is smothered to death by pope on smurf's orders. (season 1)
molly gordon as nicky belmont, j's girlfriend who later hooks up with craig. she leaves town and goes back to live with her parents. (seasons 13)
carolina guerra as lucy, baz's mistress from mexico with whom he rekindles a romance after catherine's disappearance. she is the head of a mexican gang with her brother. she is later shot dead by mia. (seasons 23, recurring season 1)
sohvi rodriguez as mia benitez, (season 4, recurring season 3) a tough young woman raised in a gang who is very rough around the edges. she later grows closer to the cody family and becomes romantically involved with j and has a mysterious and dangerous night-life. she is later shot dead by j after she told him she killed baz and robbed the family with her boyfriend tupi.
rigo sanchez as manny (recurring season 4) in 1977, the leader of young smurf's ruthless career criminals.
leila george as young smurf (season 5, recurring season 4)
jon beavers as young jake (season 5, recurring season 4)


== episodes ==


== production ==
tnt ordered the pilot of animal kingdom in may 2015; barkin and speedman were the first to be cast in july 2015, as matriarch smurf and her adopted son baz, respectively. in august, cole and weary were added as j and deran, with hatosy and robson soon cast as the remaining cody brothers pope and craig. alonso was later announced as baz's wife catherine, and molly gordon as j's girlfriend nicky.the project was picked up to series with a 10-episode order in december 2015. the show debuted on june 14, 2016, and on july 6, 2016 tnt renewed it for a 13-episode second season. on july 27 tnt announced it would be renewing animal kingdom for a third season, which premiered on may 29, 2018. the season 3 premiere was aired after a game on tnt beginning 12:30/11:30 central the day before the premiere. on july 2, 2018, tnt renewed the series for a fourth season. production on the fourth season began on january 10, 2019. the fourth season premiered on may 28, 2019. on july 24, 2019, tnt renewed the series for a fifth season.on march 16, 2020, production on the fifth season was suspended "until further notice.". production on the fifth season resumed on september 7, 2020. filming for the season wrapped on december 11, 2020.on january 14, 2021, ahead of the fifth season premiere, tnt renewed the series for a sixth and final season. production on the season began on march 6, 2021.


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
the first season of animal kingdom has received positive reviews. on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the season has an approval rating of 76% based on 33 reviews. the consensus is: "bolstered by ellen barkin's acting prowess, animal kingdom is a darkly intriguing, although occasionally predictable, twisted family drama." on metacritic, the series has a score of 65 out of 100, based on 27 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".


=== ratings ===


=== accolades ===


== international broadcast ==
in australia, it is available on netflix with new episodes added weekly.in canada, the show is broadcast on ctv drama channel, formerly known as bravo, and all four seasons are available on netflix. beginning with its fourth season, the episodes were broadcast on bravo at the same time and day as the original tnt broadcasts.


== syndication ==
all episodes are available to watch free for amazon prime users.


== home media ==
the first season was released in dvd and blu-ray formats on april 28, 2017. each set contains behind-the-scenes featurettes and deleted scenes. the home media for the first two season's dvd releases were distributed by warner bros. home entertainment. going forward starting with season 3, the warner archive collection who also produce the blu-ray format since season 2, began releasing manufacture on demand dvd releases for the remaining seasons.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website 
animal kingdom at imdb