the boys is a 1962 british courtroom drama film, directed by sidney j. furie and with a screenplay by stuart douglass.


== plot ==
four youths, described frequently but incorrectly as teddy boys, are on trial for the murder of a garage night watchman in the course of a burglary on the night of january 15. 
witnesses and the accused give differing accounts of the lead-up to the crime, a dispiriting and frustrating evening out in london. flashbacks of the teenagers' insecure and sometimes alienated lives contrast strongly with the austere legality of the courtroom as, by degrees, the truth emerges.
the film acts as a series of vignettes, relating to the evidence of each witness, who saw the boys on the evening in question. each story helps to build an overall picture of their character. the overall ambience is that adults presumed they were bad without basing this on any actual observation.
most witnesses admit they prejudged the boys' character based on appearance.
the boys admit to their defence that they are hooligans and badly behaved but deny murder.
after seeing a series of views representing the witnesses we then see a boy-by-boy insight into their home lives. we see stan first, whose mum is very ill and they are trying to get rehoused. stan has a habit of constantly cleaning his fingernails with a flick-knife: a knife identical to the murder weapon.
barney is questioned next. he is the most clean-cut of the group.
ginger is the only one working (on a building site). despite being the one with the most money he is the most reserved.
much of the storyline revolves around the three aces public house which was opposite the lantern garage where the murder occurred.
a lot of the plot explains the suspicious words witnesses heard them say.
however, the prosecution spot a flaw in the overall logic of their stories: stan says he bought a packet of cigarettes for his mum after a point where he did not even have the bus fare home. the sad truth is revealed: stan did indeed instigate the robbery, and was joined by billy and barney. ginger was unaware of any of this.
ginger is acquitted. billy and barney are under 18 and are to be held indefinitely at her majesty's pleasure. stan, being 18, is sentenced to death.


== cast ==
richard todd - victor webster, prosecuting counsel
robert morley - montgomery, defence counsel
dudley sutton - stan coulter
ronald lacey - william (billy) herne
tony garnett - jim (ginger) thompson
jess conrad - barney lee
felix aylmer - the judge
wilfrid brambell - robert brewer (as wilfred bramble)
roy kinnear - mark samuel (bus conductor)
allan cuthbertson - randolph st. john (as alan cuthbertson)
colin gordon - gordon lonsdale
wensley pithey - mr. coulter (as wensley athey)
kenneth j. warren - george tanner
patrick magee - mr. lee
david lodge - mr. herne
mavis villiers - celia barker
betty marsden - mrs. herne
laurence hardy - patmore
charles morgan - samuel wallace
carol white - evelyn may
patrick newell - crowhurst
rita webb - mrs. lee
tom chatto - morris
harold scott - caldwell
george moon - mr. champneys
hilda fenemore - mrs. thompson (as hilda fennemore)
lloyd lamble - inspector larner


=== uncredited ===
olga dickie - mrs. coulter
ian fleming - court official
kevin stoney - police inspector who is quizzed by qcs at the trial
brian weske - club announcer
ian wilson


== soundtrack ==
the shadows composed four songs for the film that were released as an ep.


== critical reception ==
bbc.co.uk called it an "innovative kitchen-sink drama charting the rise of teenage gang culture." 
tv guide noted "good performances all around, but the effect is muddled by a complicated flashback structure." 
allmovie wrote "the boys benefits from furie's dextrous use of flashbacks during the testimony scenes." 


== legacy ==
on 17 september 2017, the 55th anniversary of the film's release, the three surviving "boys", conrad, garnett and sutton, met for a reunion showing of the film at elstree studios where the courtroom scenes were filmed. it was explained at the q&a section of the event that this was the first time any of the four had met since the film was made.


== references ==


== external links ==
the boys at imdb
the boys at rotten tomatoes