the sleeping room is a 2014 british horror film that was directed by john shackleton. it had its world premiere on 23 august 2014 at the london frightfest film festival and stars leila mimmack as a call girl who finds herself entangled in a series of strange events surrounding a hidden room. funding for the sleeping room was raised using equity crowdfunding and is credited as being the first british film to use this method.


== plot ==
blue (leila mimmack) is a call girl working out of brighton that has been sent out to an old building that bill (joseph beattie) is trying to restore. she's somewhat surprised when he shows little interest in having sex with her, but ends up staying in the house with him since he has paid for her time. as she is looking around blue discovers a mutoscope, through which she sees a series of moving images depicting a hooded man (christopher adamson). shortly after that, blue and bill discover a secret room that is the key to unlocking many dark and terrifying secrets relating to blues family, and the death of her mother


== cast ==
julie graham as cynthia
christopher adamson as fiskin
joseph beattie as bill
chris waller as glenny
leila mimmack as blue
david sibley as freddie
lucy clements as helena
nicola colmer as tv presenter
billy chainsaw as neighbour
mike altmann as jim whipps
antonia northam as abigail
chrisanthe grech as librarian
barry kristopher sullivan as tv presenter


== reception ==
the film received generally negative reviews from critics, though the number of reviews is limited due to its limited release.
nerdly gave the sleeping room a four star review and wrote "a superb example of modern british horror, the sleeping room, like fellow frightfest movie the forgotten, marks a new bright future for genre filmmaking in the uk that, in a perfect world, would be held in the same esteem as hammers prolific output." anton bitel of grolsch film works also praised the sleeping room, stating "once the possessions and ghostly manifestations have fully kicked in, it all becomes a little punch and judy ... but the sleeping room works best as an incestuous love letter to brighton and the town's darker, ever-present history."shock till you drop gave a mixed review for the sleeping room, writing "while the leads are appealing and fiskin is very creepy looking, the mystery fails to deliver suspense or scares. the snuff films are meant to terrify, but they are more silly than scary as glimpsed through an old machine. and the conclusion, a dragged out chase and showdown in the old building, is perfunctory and fairly dull, making a short movie feel much longer than it actually is." others were more critical such as top 10 films which, in its one-star review, praised the performance of actress leila mimmack but felt the film was handicapped by a convoluted script that contained "one-note characters" and a reliance on "horror tropes". it wrote: "[john] shackleton never knows whether to stick or twist leaving the sleeping room engaging the wrong gears like a premature learner driver behind the wheel for the first time."


== references ==


== external links ==
the sleeping room at imdb
the sleeping room on kickstarter