the amazing mr. x, also known as the spiritualist, is a 1948 american horror thriller film noir directed by bernard vorhaus with cinematography by john alton. the film tells the story of a phony spiritualist racket. the film is prominently featured in alton's book on cinematography painting with light (1949).
the film stars turhan bey, lynn bari, cathy o'donnell, and richard carlson. eagle-lion films signed a contract with carole landis for the part played by bari, but landis committed suicide a few days before filming began. the film is in the public domain.


== plot ==

two years after her husband's death, christine faber (lynn bari) thinks she hears her late husband (donald curtis) calling out of the surf on the beach one night. she meets a tall dark man named alexis (turhan bey) who seems to know all about her.
after more ghostly manifestations, christine and her younger sister (cathy o'donnell) become enmeshed in the strange life of alexis, a spiritualist; but he in turn finds himself manipulated into deeper devilry than he had in mind. alexis has hired emily (virginia gregg) as christine's maid to learn secret inside information. sister janet checks out alexis only to fall in love with him. christine gets engaged to martin (richard carlson) and he hires a detective (harry mendoza) to protect christine.
alexis puts on a convincing sance and afterward the real paul faber appears. he had faked his own death and now alexis must continue his con in concert with paul. christine hears paul's voice and falls off a cliff only to be saved by alexis and janet. martin wants christine to leave her house for safety. christine wants to hear paul's voice and his piano music. janet starts to search the house for speakers and she finds alexis and the alive paul. alexis protects janet but he is shot. the police arrive and shoot and kill paul.


== cast ==
turhan bey as alexis
lynn bari as christine faber
cathy o'donnell as janet burke
richard carlson as martin abbott
donald curtis as paul faber
virginia gregg as emily
harry mendoza as detective hoffman


== production ==
the film was known as the spiritualist. it was an original story by crane wilbur and was bought by producers releasing corporation in 1947, with wilbur slated to direct.eventually the project was acquired by eagle lion as a vehicle for turhan bey, who was under contract to the studio. bernard vorhaus was to direct and muriel bolton to adapt the story into a script. vorhaus did the film under a two-picture deal he signed with eagle lion. the other lead roles went to lynn bari and cathy o'donnell; the latter was borrowed from sam goldwyn.crane would go on to become one of eagle lion's main writers. vorhaus later said he was unhappy with the script, however, and asked for a rewrite. he says producer ben stoloff allowed him to hire ian mclellan hunter, who rewrote the script in a week.filming started 5 january 1948. vorhaus says the shoot went for three weeks.bey was under contract to eagle lion. he later recalled the film as "a fantastic role with wonderful people to work with and a lovely death scene i completely loused up... i just wish all my roles had been as interesting as that one."at one stage the film was also known as the mystic.


== reception ==
at previews, audiences found parts of the film to be funny, resulting in unintended laughter.eagle lion were happy with the film. however, when vorhaus turned down the next movie they offered him, i married a communist, the company terminated its association with him.


== see also ==
list of films in the public domain in the united states


== notes ==


== references ==
vorhaus, bernard (2000). saved from oblivion: an autobiography. scarecrow press.


== external links ==
the amazing mr. x, full movie on youtube
the amazing mr. x is available for free download at the internet archive
the amazing mr. x at imdb
the spiritualist at the tcm movie database
the amazing mr. x at allmovie