thirumalai is a 2003 indian tamil-language romantic action film written and directed by ramana. this film stars  vijay and jyothika in lead roles, while vivek, raghuvaran, kausalya and karunas play supporting roles.
produced by kavithalayaa productions banner, thirumalai shows vijay playing a bike mechanic of the pudupet area in chennai. this film was a turning point in vijay's career as he transitioned himself into a leading action hero from a romantic hero in his acting career. filming began in march 2002 and was planned for a 2002 christmas release, but the delays in dubbing sessions and some reshot scenes made it release by october 2003, during diwali, and was declared as a successful venture at the box office, despite the delaysthe film was remade in telugu as gowri with sumanth and charmme kaur in  2004 & dhallywood (cinema of bangladesh) as  kotha dao sathi hobe  with shakib khan and apu biswas in 2007.


== plot ==
thirumalai (vijay) is a mechanic who lives with his friends in puthupet, chennai. on the occasion of 2002 new year's eve, he meets swetha (jyothika) who wishes him good luck for the upcoming year, as happened, thirumalai consider her as a good luck charm for him and falls in love with her. he begins stalking her. but she beats him up with the help of her goons. after realizing his good nature, she apologizes and reciprocates his feelings. this is opposed by her father ashok (avinash), who calls a thug named arasu (manoj k. jayan), who has a reputation of being a big mafia crime boss in chennai. hence, thirumalai fights with them and this makes arasu realize all of his misbehavior. in the end, arasu changes his mind about the match, and ashok also realizes his mistakes. he accepts their love finally, and both reunite with each other.


== cast ==


== production ==
the filming began in march 2002, when vijay was simultaneously shooting for his previous action flick, bagavathi (2002). directing the film was debutant ramana who had apprenticed with director r. k. selvamani. the shooting finally ended in november 2002. on 15 january 2003, vijay stated that he had started dubbing for his portions of the film. vijay also sported a new look, which he maintained for his subsequent films until thuppakki (2012).
namrata shirodkar was chosen initially to play the female lead. but the director was not satisfied with her onscreen presence and she was replaced by jyothika. this is her second film with vijay after kushi (2000).
a set resembling a market place with a mechanic shop in it was erected at mohan studios at a cost of about  50 lakh. designed by art director kathir, shooting took place there for 30 days. the film's shooting occurred in chennai, nellore and vishakhapatnam, while the songs were filmed in egypt and switzerland.


== soundtrack ==
music was composed by vidyasagar. the audio's album consisting of five songs, was released on 25 december 2002. the audio was also well received among the audience.


== release ==
the film was released on 24 october 2003.  the film was later dubbed into hindi as dum 2 in 2015 by goldmines telefilms with vijay's voice dubbed by chetanya adib. despite the remade telugu version, the original film was again dubbed in telugu as gharana mogudu and it was dubbed in malayalam as the same title of this movie.


== reception ==
now running gave the film 3 out of 5 stars and stated "yet another poor-boy rich-girl romance with parental opposition and mafia interference". chennai online wrote "there's nothing fresh here that we haven't seen in an earlier vijay film. the vijay-jyotika pair, after their successful combination in kushi, was expected to re-create the same magic on screen. but it doesn't happen". thiraipadam wrote "thirumalai sees director ramana working within two big limitations. he has an age-old poor boy-rich girl love story in hand and has to contend with vijay's mass image. considering these restrictions, he has done a commendable job. by fashioning the hero's character a little differently and designing a fast screenplay that contains several stock situations but resolves them differently, he overcomes those negatives to deliver an entertaining feature". behindwoods wrote " things were never going easy for vijay until thirumalai happened and resurrected his image as a mass hero that hes become today. the film was a well executed commercial potboiler which showcased vijay excelling at all aspects of his role."


== references ==


== external links ==
thirumalai at imdb