three kings is a 2011 indian malayalam-language spoof caper film directed by v. k. prakash and starring jayasurya, kunchacko boban, indrajith sukumaran, samvrutha sunil, ann augustine and sandhya in lead roles.


== plot ==
shanku (jayasurya), ram (kunchacko boban) and bhaskar (indrajith) are three cousins from a royal family  who always fight with each other from childhood. none of them allows others to prosper and creates trouble for each other in whatever they do. their parents have taken money from a money lender called dinakaran who has given the money on the lease of the place. when the debts increased, the three realized that they cannot repay the money and get back the palace and so they try to steal the papers from dinakaran's house with the help of his daughters who are the girlfriends of the three kings. but dinakaran catches them and hands them over to the police.
in the police lockup, they happen to hear from a blind man that there is a treasure hidden somewhere in the mysore forest which belonged to their family. he says that this was hidden by tipu sultan centuries back. he can help them if they promise to give him a portion of it. but that night, his illness becomes worse and he dies on his way to the hospital, but he hands the three a map of the treasure before he leaves the cell.
the three kings leave to mysore to find the treasure. each of them takes a different route and tries to be there first and make the treasure their own, but ultimately they have join hands because each of them had only one portion of the map which they split while having a fight in the police lockup. finally they finds the treasure but it turns out that everything was a forged play and they were part of a reality show which a popular channel organized. they all end up humiliated because cameras were following them every moment and caught all their fights on camera and broadcast it.
but during one of the fights they had inside the cave, it turns out that the three kings misplaced the gold idol kept by the channel and took the real golden idol itself. this makes them all rich and they take back the palace from the money lender. the three kings get married with their girlfriends and they gets three kids. in the final scene, it is shown that their three kids are also fighting with each other the same way their fathers did when they were kids showing us that the legacy continues.


== cast ==
jayasurya as shankaran unni raja, alias shanku, aspiring film and television serial actor who wants to be famous to make loads of money
kunchacko boban as raman unni raja, alias ram, who is trying to make a fast buck by taking part in various reality shows on television
indrajith as bhaskaran unni raja, alias bhasi, who is trying to make a mark on the cricket field
samvrutha sunil as anju, shankar's girlfriend, eldest of the sisters.
sandhya as manju, bhasi's girlfriend. second of the sisters.
ann augustine as ranju, ram's girlfriend. youngest of the sisters.
ashokan as ashok varma, cousin of the 3 "kings" and planner of the treasure hunt
jagathy sreekumar as dinakaran
suraj venjaramoodu as terrorist
salim kumar as k. s. prashanthan
vijay babu as channel head
sasi kalinga as one of the actors in ashok varma's plan of the treasure hunt
kunchan as himself (special appearance)
sreejith ravi as murugappan a.k.a. ramachandran nair
balachandran chullikadu as shankaran unni raja's father
ambika mohan as shankaran unni raja's mother
gita nair as raman unni raja's mother
omana ouseph as bhaskaran unni raja's mother
majeed as an advocate
gayathri -special appearance in the song


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the film, composed by ouseppachan, features 4 comic-genre songs.


== references ==