thrissivaperoor kliptham (english: thrissivaperoor ltd.) is a 2017 indian malayalam-language film directed by debutant ratheish kumar and written by ps rafeeque. it stars asif ali, chemban vinod jose, aparna balamurali, baburaj and shilpi sharma. it was produced jointly by fareed khan and shaleel azeez under the banner of whitesands media house the film was released on 11 august 2017.


== plot ==
david 'davis' pauly (chemban vinod) hails from thrissur. his marriage with a lady (sneha sreekumar), arranged by his brother sensilavos (abi), is unsuccessful, after a bottle of alcohol, which one of his 'friends' sent him as a present and he hid, breaks in the church. davy's aunt speculates that joy chembadan (baburaj), davy's classmate in school and now arch-nemesis, was the one who sent it to him.
girija 'giri' vallabhan (asif ali) is from pattikad and is naive. he is friends with ambiyettan (nandhu), an emigrant guru from another part of kerala, who introduces him to davy and his gang, consisting of bahuleyan (irshad), philip kannadakkaran (rony david) and alahu (achuthanandhan), after a fight in the market with joy's henchmen.
in a parallel storyline, bhageerathi "baaghi" is an honorable female auto driver trying to save two young girls (whom she knows, also her neighbor) from turning into prostitutes at the insistence of ayyappan, a wicked man also bhaagi's neighbor who is hellbent on forcing them to sell their bodies. it is also portrayed that the girls' father is in dire need of money, for which their mother, unable to pay the bills for her husband's operation, is ready to let her daughters be prostitutes.
conflicts naturally occur between davy and joy. once, when joy orders film actress nileena mehndi (shilpi sharma) to inaugurate his shop, he shows off and looks down on davy for not being able to do the same. enraged by this, davy decided to kidnap and coerce the one responsible for helping joy get davy, rent-a-star mansoor (sudeesh), nileena mehndi's assistant.
when davy and their gang finally do succeed in capturing mansoor, no matter how much they force him, he refuses to tell nileena to back off the deal made with joy (for which advance of 30 lakhs are collected). infuriated, davy barks at sudeesh violently, forcefully stating that he was calling upon nileena for an inauguration, and not for fornication. unmoved by davy's recklessness, mansoor replies coolly, stating that although the withdrawal of nileena's contract to joy isn't possible, she would gladly spend a night with one person - only one person - in a one-night stand for 10 lakh rupees.
shocked at this revelation, the gang lets him go. they, with deceit and helplessness, make up 10 lakh rupees. amidst this, though, joy embarrasses one of davy's gang members by arresting him with his separated wife in a shady hotel falsely accusing him of adultery. after this, davy swears to take revenge from joy. they realize that only one of them can be the lucky one, so they put on a lucky draw, in which giri is able to win. hence, giri heads to a hotel holding a suitcase filled with 10 lakh rupees, as per mansoor's instructions. meanwhile, outraged by how close he got to ruining the innocent women's lives through prostitution, baaghi vengefully kills ayyappan in a celebration.
a little time later, davy and gang see on the news that nileena will be retiring from her acting career temporarily due to cancer. appalled, they visit the exact same hotel, where they notice that the bag of money is missing from giri. they investigate with the help of kozhikkaran cheru (tg ravi), davy's friend and a local businessman, also a professional gambler and owns a local casino. cheru tells them that mansoor's actual name was porinju. it is revealed that he was the driver of cheru. porinju stabbed cheru and ran away with the money of cheru.
after hearing the story of cheru, the next day, they are able to corner porinju (who was about to escape), where he reveals that when he went in the hotel room, even he wasn't able to find the money. davy hands him over to joy, who was also scammed of his money. when they reach their residence, they find baaghi there, who confesses to have taken the money for the operation. she says that, in return for the money, she is willing to sleep with any one of them, for one night.
in the end, davy has finally gotten a girl all thanks to joy who has now understood his mistake, and giri and baaghi have fallen in love with each other, thwarting baaghi's plan of "just a one-night stand".


== cast ==
asif ali as girija 'giri' vallabhan, bhaagi's love interest
chemban vinod as david 'davis' pauly
aparna balamurali as bhageerathy 'bhaagi', giri's love interest
baburaj as joy chembadan
vijayakumar
rony david as philip kannadakkaran
irshad as bahuleyan
abi as sensilavos
sudheesh as mansoor / porinju
vineeth mohan as fr. gregory pauly
shilpi sharma as nilina mehndi
parvathi t as mini chechi
jewel mary as sunitha p.s i.a.s
t g ravi as kozhikkaran cheru
meghanathan as subramanian
nandhu as ambiyettan
zarina wahab as ammachi
rachana narayanankutty
sreejith ravi as s.i sheherladen / cherlaapu
prasanth alexander
jayaraj warrier
sunil sukhada
gilu joseph as damayanthi
neeraja rajendran as giri's mother
arya salim as saramma police constable
vijilesh karayad


== production ==
the film is produced by fareed khan and shaleel azeez under the banner of whitesands media house. asif ali and aparna balamurali plays the lead roles. on september 2016, shooting began in thrissur.


== soundtrack ==
all songs were composed by bijibal.


== references ==


== external links ==
thrissivaperoor kliptham at imdb