thumbelina (also known as hans christian andersen's thumbelina) is a 1994 american animated musical fantasy film directed by don bluth and gary goldman, based on the story of the same name by hans christian andersen. the film stars the voices of jodi benson, gary imhoff and john hurt, with supporting roles from gino conforti, charo, gilbert gottfried, carol channing and joe lynch.the film was produced by don bluth ireland ltd., and distributed by warner bros. under its family entertainment imprint was released in theaters on march 30, 1994.


== plot ==
a lonely widow longing for a child of her own is given a barley seed by a friendly witch. the planted seed grows into a flower, and a tiny girl emerges from inside, no bigger than the old woman's thumb. the old woman names the tiny girl thumbelina and raises her as her own. although thumbelina loves her mother, she craves companionship from someone her own size. one night, the fairy prince cornelius stumbles upon thumbelina after hearing her singing. the two take a ride on cornelius' bumblebee and fall in love. during this ride, mrs. toad and her son grundel are enchanted by thumbelina's singing. that night, mrs. toad kidnaps thumbelina, desiring her to join their show troupe and marry grundel. thumbelina is rescued by jacquimo, a swallow. meanwhile, cornelius learns of her kidnapping and returns to his kingdom, the vale of the fairies, to ask his parents to try holding back the winter as long as they can.
grundel learns thumbelina escaped, and ventures out to find her. while trying to get home, thumbelina is ambushed by berkeley beetle, who promises to show her the way home if she sings at his beetle ball. she reluctantly complies, but her bug disguise falls off during the concert and she is denounced as ugly. beetle rejects her without helping her. she is next found by jacquimo, who promises to find cornelius. beetle is confronted by grundel and suggests that grundel kidnap cornelius and use him as bait to lure thumbelina. grundel coerces beetle into partnership by removing his wings.
upon the arrival of winter, cornelius falls into a pond by beetle's trap and is frozen, while jacquimo injures his wing and loses consciousness from the extreme cold. thumbelina is forced to take refuge in an old shoe, where she is discovered by miss fieldmouse and granted shelter in her underground house. after relaying cornelius' fate to her, miss fieldmouse introduces her to her neighbor mr. mole, who becomes infatuated with her and desires to marry her. devastated by the apparent loss of cornelius, thumbelina gives in to hopelessness and accepts mr. mole's proposal. jacquimo revives and, before thumbelina can get a chance to explain him what happened to cornelius, resolves to find him before the wedding.
beetle and grundel find cornelius' frozen body and learn of thumbelina's wedding. when they leave cornelius behind, a trio of friendly insects find and thaw cornelius. at the wedding, thumbelina finds herself unable to marry mr. mole after remembering cornelius' promise to always love her. grundel and beetle arrive, and a chase ensues. cornelius also arrives and engages grundel in a fight. jacquimo finds the vale of the fairies and takes thumbelina there. she and cornelius reunite, and she magically grows her own pair of wings upon accepting his proposal. with her mother and the fairy court in attendance, the two marry and depart on cornelius' bumblebee.
the credits images reveal that beetle's wings regrew and he resumed his pop career; grundel survived the fight with a broken leg and married a female toad to his mom's delight; and mr. mole married miss fieldmouse.


== voice cast ==
jodi benson as thumbelina, a tiny young woman who is not as big as her adoptive mother's thumb, and falls in love with the handsome fairy prince cornelius.
gary imhoff as prince cornelius, the prince of the fairies and thumbelina's love interest.
joe lynch as grundel toad, a toad in love with thumbelina
gino conforti as jacquimo, a wise swallow who speaks with a french accent. he is the partial narrator of the story.
gilbert gottfried as berkeley beetle, a beetle singer who owns his own "beetle band" and a so-called "connoisseur of sweet nectars, a designer of rare threads, and a judge of beautiful women." he is forced by grundel to help him to find thumbelina.
carol channing as ms. fieldmouse, a rather greedy yet kind field mouse who takes thumbelina in from the cold and persuades her to marry mr. mole.
john hurt as mr. mole, a fabulously wealthy but self-involved and cynical mole who falls in love with thumbelina after hearing her voice.
barbara cook as thumbelina's mother, the kind widow who mothers thumbelina since her birth from a flower.
charo as mrs. toad, a gorgeous and famous spanish singer and mother to her three sons mozo, gringo, and grundel.
kenneth mars as king colbert, cornelius' father
june foray as queen tabitha, cornelius' mother
will ryan as hero, reverend rat. additionally, ryan voiced multiple background characters, including several beetles, barnyard animals, and other various insects.
danny mann as mozo, grundel's younger brother
loren lester as gringo, grundel's younger brother
pat musick as mrs. rabbit
neil ross as mr. bear, mr. fox
tawny sunshine glover as gnatty, one of the jitterbugs.
michael nunes as li'l bee, one of the jitterbugs.
kendall cunningham as baby bug, one of the jitterbugs


== music ==

barry manilow agreed to compose the songs for three don bluth pictures. thumbelina was the first, followed by the pebble and the penguin, and the third was canceled. the film's soundtrack was released for a limited time and has since gone out of print. "marry the mole" won a razzie for worst original song.


== production and release ==
thumbelina was in production from february 1991 to may 1993 at don bluth ireland ltd. (formerly known as sullivan bluth studios at that time) in dublin, ireland, even though principal recording and animation would not begin until early 1992. the film was completed with funds from filmmaker john boorman and hong kong-based media assets after don bluth entertainment filed for bankruptcy.it was originally scheduled to be distributed by metro-goldwyn-mayer in north america and j&m entertainment overseas and was also originally slated for a thanksgiving 1993 release in the united states. however, by the time it was completed, both companies dropped the arrangement due to concerns about the bankruptcy of bluth's studio. during sullivan bluth's bankruptcy proceedings, the court trustee presented the film to disney's film distribution unit, buena vista pictures distribution. the trustee ultimately declined disney's deal to distribute the film. warner bros. bought the distribution rights in march 1993, and thumbelina was released on march 30, 1994. when released, it was preceded by the animaniacs short, i'm mad.


== reception ==


=== box office ===
the film was a commercial failure, grossing $11.4 million at the us and canadian box office. in 24 markets internationally it grossed $5.2 million for a worldwide total of at least $16.6 million against a budget of $28 million.


=== critical reception ===
rotten tomatoes gave the film a 27% approval rating based on 11 reviews, with an average score of 5.17 out of 10.james berardinelli of reelviews gave the film 3 out of 4 and wrote: "thumbelina is close to, but not quite at, the level of the little mermaid, the weakest of disney's recent entries."roger ebert gave the film two stars out of four, concluding his review "it is difficult to imagine anyone over the age of 12 finding much to enjoy in thumbelina."it won a razzie award in the category of "worst original song" given to "marry the mole", sung by carol channing.the film reportedly received higher scores with test screening audiences when warner bros. replaced their logo with that of walt disney pictures.


== home media releases ==
warner home video released thumbelina on vhs and laserdisc on july 26, 1994, in the united states and canada, and internationally in different countries throughout the 1990s. the film was re-released on vhs in the united kingdom in march 1995. warner home video released the film on dvd on march 21, 1999.on february 19, 2002, thumbelina was re-released on vhs and dvd; licensed by 20th century fox home entertainment. 
on march 6, 2012, thumbelina was then released on blu-ray.
the movie was available to view on disney+ when it launched in november 2019 after disney bought 20th century fox (which licensed the film's distribution rights from warner bros. in 2002), until it was removed in july 2020. it remains available to view in other countries.


== see also ==

list of warner bros. theatrical animated features
list of american films of 1994


== references ==


== external links ==
thumbelina at imdb
thumbelina at the big cartoon database
thumbelina at allmovie
thumbelina at box office mojo