thunderbirds is a 1952 war film directed by john h. auer and starring john derek, john drew barrymore, mona freeman, gene evans, eileen christy and ward bond. it features the exploits of the 45th infantry division in the italian campaign of world war ii. the film was made by republic pictures with sequences filmed at fort sill, oklahoma.


== plot ==
close friends gil hackett and tom mccreary both love and leave the same girl, mary caldwell, after they are called up to the oklahoma national guard and then on to the army for wartime duty in 1940.
a tough, stoic sergeant named logan keeps an eye on them as the unit ships out to europe following the japanese bombing of pearl harbor. tom speaks of his father, who supposedly died a hero's death in the first world war, but another soldier claims he's heard that tom's father was disgraced and dishonorably discharged.
mary reveals that tom is the one she loves. gil finds solace in meeting lt. ellen henderson, a nurse. the fighting continues in italy and sicily and when tom ends up missing, logan will not permit a search. logan later heroically reports a movement of german tanks just before being shot.
with the invasion of southern france at hand, it is learned that logan had been court-martialed during world war i for authorizing a search party that led to the death of more soldiers. he reenlisted under a false name to prove himself again, particularly to tom, who is actually his son.


== cast ==
john derek as lt. gil hacket
john barrymore jr. as pvt. tom mccreery (as john barrymore jr.)
mona freeman as ft ellen henderson
gene evans as sgt. mike braggart
eileen christy as marry caldwell
ward bond as lt. john mccreery
barton maclane as sgt. durkee
wally cassell as pfc. sam jacobs
ben cooper  as calvin jones
scott elliott as keith watson (as robert neil)
slim pickens as pvt. wes shelby
armando silvestre as cpl. ralph mogay
norman budd as pvt. lou radtke
mae clarke as mrs. jones
sammy mckim as cpl. ray hanford (as sam mckim)
allene roberts as margie hanford
richard simmons as capt. norton
walter reed as lt. hammond
suzanne dalbert as marie etienne
barbara pepper as mrs. louise braggart
pepe hern as pvt. jim lastchance
victor millan as pvt. joe lastchance


== references ==


== external links ==
thunderbirds at imdb