thuruppugulan is a 2006 malayalam comedy film directed by johny antony and written by the udayakrishna-siby k. thomas duo. the film stars mammootty, innocent, sneha, jagathy sreekumar, cochin haneefa, salim kumar, and suraj venjaramoodu. the music was composed by alex paul. the film follows kunjumon, a kochi-based street restaurant owner, who is known more commonly by his nickname 'gulan' among friends and natives. the film was released on april 14, 2006 and coincided with the 'vishu' festival.


== plot ==
a kind-hearted street-rowdy manages his own problems while his fathers mate's daughter arrives. he promises to help her and succeeds in it. 
mr. menon (devan), a multi-millionaire, buys a considerable amount of real estate. he entrusts it to one of his lieutenants, sreedharan unnithan (kalashala babu), to construct a 5-star hotel in kochi. he also buys a small plot adjacent to a 5-star hotel and gives it to kochuthoma (innocent), kunjumon's (mammootty) father, to construct a small tea and snack restaurant. menon leaves for singapore and kunjumon is sent to calicut by his father who fears that his son's life might be in danger after he has been badly wounded by one of the local goons who picked a fight with menon. 
twenty years later, unnithan fails in forcing kochuthoma to vacate the land since the restaurant is damaging the reputation of the hotel. unnithan uses a rowdy man named tipper vasu (bheeman raghu) to make kochuthoma sign a contract to vacate the land, but kunjumon arrives and fights off tipper vasu who gets hospitalized after the fight. then, unnithan uses the local police to remove kochuthoma once and for all. but, kunjumon arrives and uses his money and power to jail unnithan and kochuthoma. 
meanwhile, menon decides to return to his native land to have his daughter married. but unnithan and his sons, to foil his plans, have him framed and imprisoned. his daughter, lakshmi (sneha) travels to kerala to find a way to help her father. after some events, she meets up with the hero gulaan kunjumon (this part takes place before kunjumon and his father were jailed), the hero of the calicut market. both of them go to kochi.
to avenge his imprisonment, kunjumon leases the bar in the 5-star hotel through swamy (jagathy sreekumar) and spoils the hotel's reputation. with many twists and turns and a lot of misunderstanding, it becomes clear to lakshmi that kunjumon, aka gulan, is the son of kochuthoma and kunjumon finally realizes that lakshmi is the daughter of menon, not unnithan.
kunjumon and lakshmi struggle to release menon and imprison unnithan and his cruel sons. finally, menon is released from prison and returns to kerala. this time, kochuthoma tries to block an agreement regarding unnithan as the future hire of the hotel. kunjumon, along with menon and swamy, rushes to the hotel to fight. the movie ends with kunjumon tearing up the contract...


== cast ==
mammootty as kunjumon a.k.a. gulan
innocent  as kochuthoma (father of gulan)
sneha as lakshmi menon
jagathy sreekumar as swamy
salim kumar as khadar and khadar
harisree ashokan as shathru
kalashala babu as sreedharan unnithan
cochin haneefa as raman kartha
janardhanan as constable pillai
devan  as chandrasekhara menon
vijayaraghavan as d.g.p varma
suresh krishna as unnithan's son
baburaj as unnithan's son
bheeman raghu as tipper vasu
suraj venjaramood as appukuttan
sidiq as sub registrar
kalabhavan shajon
bindu ramakrishnan
urmila unni as dgp's wife
ponnamma babu as dance teacher
ambika mohan as sreedharan unnithan's wife
raj kapoor as sub-inspector aarumugham
vyshakh as hotel receptionist
ceylon manohar as chorathadam raghavan


== soundtrack ==
the movie has three songs composed by alex paul.


== critical reception ==
india glitz criticised several aspects of the film, claiming that "even though the basic plot seems to be promising, the film has lost the tempo in the second half cluttered to become a star show." the review concluded that "the highlight of the film is the brisk pace by which the director johny antony passes through the events without lending time to think about the other loopy crass. the film is sure to hold masses for its wholesome entertainment, even though in weaker terms."


== box office ==
second highest grossing malayalam movie of 2006 after classmates.


== references ==


== external links ==
thuruppugulan at imdb
http://www.nowrunning.com/movie/2821/malayalam/thuruppu-gulan/review.htm
http://www.indiaglitz.com/channels/malayalam/preview/8156.html