tridev (transl.trinity) is a 1989 indian action thriller film directed by rajiv rai. it stars sunny deol, jackie shroff, naseeruddin shah, madhuri dixit, sangeeta bijlani and sonam . the film was critically and commericially successful at the box office and was third highest grossing film of 1989 behind maine pyar kiya and ram lakhan and won three filmfare awards  at the 35th filmfare awards in 1990.the film was remade in telugu as nakshatra poratam, with suman, bhanuchander, and arun pandian .


== plot ==
bhujang (amrish puri), a powerful crime lord, has an honest politician assassinated on behalf of his arms supplier. inspector karan saxena (sunny deol) is assigned to the case. karan is the son of a respected judge. karan is in love with divya (madhuri dixit) and they both are engaged. divya's father is the commissioner of police, mathur (anupam kher). her brother ravi (jackie shroff) is the hot-headed black sheep of the family.
karan arrests a small-time arms seller, ramesh and finds out when the arms shipments are smuggled in. at the next arms drop, karan arrests the dealer don. bhujang has inspector karan framed and has ramesh and karan's father, the judge, killed. commissioner mathur is aware of karan's honesty but has him transferred to a remote village due to pressure from his seniors. at his new post, karan meets jai singh (naseeruddin shah) and finds out that jai's father was murdered by a dacoit called bhairav. at the time the local police was headed by mathur, who arrested the wrong man and ignored the testimony of the young jai.
bhujang's brother raghav is doing time for illegal possession of weapons. bhujang abducts divya to force her father, commissioner mathur, to release raghav. ravi breaks raghav out from prison and bhujang invites ravi to join his gang. when commissioner mathur decides to bring karan back, bhujang sends ravi and his men to have karan killed. they tie up karan in his house and burn it down, but karan escapes with the help of a knife ravi gave him in secret. at bhujang's house, ravi meets natasha (sangeeta bijlani). natasha is ramesh's sister, who is working with the journalist shrikant to get proof of bhujang's crimes. shrikant is later killed before he can publish his proof.
jai singh leaves for the city. renuka (sonam), an actress he met earlier, hires him as a bodyguard as she is impressed when jai catches a bag snatcher. renuka is the daughter of a corrupt politician who works with bhujang and plans to have her married to one of bhujang's sons. jai meets bhujang and recognises him as the dacoit bhairav who murdered his father.
meanwhile, karan destroys bhujang's large warehouse which stockpiled smuggled weapons, inflicting a big financial loss to bhujang. karan secretly starts working with ravi to destroy bhujang's plans
when bhujang plans to rob a global bank to overcome his financial loss, ravi gives the information to karan. jai singh finds out about the plans when he overhears renuka's father discussing it with bhujang's son and takes renuka to the bank to prove her father's misdeeds to her. at the bank, karan foils the bank robbery and kills one of bhujang's sons.
bhujang captures a large group of policemen along with commissioner mathur and has karan, ravi and jai are framed for it. he also captures divya, natasha and renuka. karan joins forces with ravi and jai to fight bhujang. they escape and break into bhujang's hideout where they defeat his men and free divya, natasha and renuka along with the captured policemen before cornering bhujang whom they then kill. the three couples karan-divya, ravi-natasha and jai-renuka finally unite and rejoice.


== cast ==
naseeruddin shah as jay singh
sunny deol as  inspector karan saxena
jackie shroff as ravi mathur
madhuri dixit as divya saxena mathur
sonam as renuka
sangeeta bijlani as natasha tejani
chandrashekhar... as politician
anupam kher as commissioner mathur
amrish puri as bhujang/bhairav singh
raza murad as mantriji
dalip tahil as don
sharat saxena as inspector suraj singh
tej sapru as bhujang's son goga
dan dhanoa as bhujang's son ranga
rajesh vivek as raghav
anjana mumtaz as sudha mathur
yunus parvez as film director
subbiraj as judge saxena
satyajeet as inspector tripathi
shekhar suman as shrikant verma
vijayendra ghatge as ramesh tejani
ajit vachhani as don's lawyer
sulabha deshpande as jaisingh mausi,special appearance cameo role
gavin packard as mr dunhill
chandrashekhar as minister laxmandas
javed khan amrohi as ramu


== accolades ==
at the 35th filmfare awards, tridev won two awards from six nominations.


== music ==
the music was given by kalyanjianandji, arrangements by viju shah and the lyrics by anand bakshi. the songs of this album like "main teri mohabbat main", "tirchi topiwale", "gali gali main phirta hai", "gajar ne kiya hai ishara" and "rat bhar jaam se" were very popular. "oye oye" samples 'rhythm is gonna get you' by miami sound machine and the tridev theme is directly copied from "one more chance" by pet shop boys. the song "oye oye" was used twice in movies double dhamaal and azhar, the song "gail gali main phirta hai" is used in hindi dubbed version of kannada-language movie k.g.f: chapter 1.
all lyrics are written by anand bakshi.


== references ==


== external links ==
tridev at imdb