tum milo toh sahi is an indian drama film starring nana patekar, dimple kapadia, suniel shetty, vidya malavade, rehan khan and anjana sukhani in the lead roles. it was released on 2 april 2010.


== plot ==
tum milo to sahi is a tale of ordinary people at different stages of life, who discover that, "their roots have intertwined so inseparably that they have become one tree and not two!" the film revolves around "art and fortunate accident", which happens to three different couples at three different stages of life  late teens, mid thirties, and late fifties. the three couples are either in the "breathlessness of being in love" or missing "that excitement". wherever they may be to begin with, the journey of life makes them discover true love  that which is left over after "being in love" has burned away. tum milo to sahi is a look at how that love makes the lives of these ordinary people.


== cast ==
nana patekar as rajagopal subramaniam
dimple kapadia as delshad nanji/delshad irani
suniel shetty as amit nagpal
vidya malavade as anita nagpal
rehan khan as bikramjeet singh
anjana sukhani as shalini kasbekar
mohnish behl as rahul sood
amit behl as mr. mehta
tanisha mukherjee in a special appearance
raghav sachar as himself in a special appearance
vrajesh hirjee as jamshed dinshaw jimmy irani
smita jaykar as the judge
neville dadachanji as manek
sarang soni as aryan
yathaarth kansal as ankur
pushtii s as priyanka
meher acharya dar as delnaz irani, delshad's daughter
farid amiri as harry
yogendra as david
surendra pal as brigadier
priyesh sagar as bheem
mukesh ahuja as hostel warden
narendra gupta as deptl store manager
rajendra jadhav as taxi driver
honey chhaya as irani anjuman incharge
kishore nandlaskar as bald old man fiat car owner
srinivas abrol as son of bald old man
jayram polekar as aslam
jagdish chauhan as eunuch
poonam mishra as dept store counter girl
chayan trivedi as doctor in hospital
megami mehta - cute little girl at the store


== soundtrack ==


== critical reception ==
though critics praised the performances of nana patekar and dimple kapadia, the movie on the whole received poor ratings. tushar joshi of mid daygave it   minty tejpal of bangalore mirror said that patekar and kapadia are "a treat to watch" in an otherwise weak film. gaurav malani of the economic times gave it two stars, claiming it is not entertaining enough, but wrote of the leads, "nana patekar is in his elements inducing humour through his straight-faced expressions. dimple kapadia as the parsi caf owner is absolutely delightful. together, nana and dimple share good chemistry and complement each other pretty well." ajit duara of open magazine concluded his review saying, "dimple is ravishing, yes, but the amateurish acting, typecasting and godawful songs let you down." mayank shekhar of hindustan times gave it anegative review. anupama chopra was critical of the film, the script and the story, but praised the leads. a more positive review came from the times of india, "watch it for the veterans' winsome act, the spirit of mumbai and for a tale told well."


== box office ==
this film mostly received negative reviews and failed at box office.


== references ==


== external links ==
tum milo toh sahi at imdb