tumsa nahin dekha (english: saw nobody like you) is a 1957 indian hindi language romance drama film, produced by sashadhar mukherjee while written and directed by nasir hussain, of filmistan pvt. ltd. the film marked hussain's evolution into a director. he had written films such as munimji and paying guest.
the film was conceived as a star vehicle for its heroine ameeta, who was the protge of filmistan studios owner tolaram jalan. much care was taken with her make-up, wardrobe and lighting. much of the film's extensive publicity was also built around the actress.
the film's huge success at the box office made the then-struggling shammi kapoor an overnight sensation instead. this was the film in which he developed his own individual look and youthful style, and was his first light-hearted musical and its success helped move him to acting in this genre. the film also stars the popular villain and character actor pran. its music is by o.p. nayyar and lyrics by majrooh sultanpuri.
the film was originally offered to dev anand, but he declined, due to which shammi kapoor was cast. the film's original lyricist was sahir, who wrote the title song, but he too opted out and majrooh sultanpuri took his place. [interview by shammi kapoor to cnn ibn telecast after his death, on 15 august 2011]


== plot ==
twenty years ago, after killing his friend, sardar rajpal flees from his hometown in shillong and re-locates to the rural area of assam along with his adopted daughter meena. he asks his wife kamla, to send their son shankar, so that he can employ him and get him married to meena. shankar arrives and he is welcomed by sardar, who employs him and introduces him to meena. a few days later, another young man shows up at his door claiming to be kamla's son. a baffled sardar also welcomes him, and puts both the young men under observation in order to find who the real shankar is. the question remains: why would anyone want to impersonate shankar, and what will happen to sardar himself after the police catch up with him for killing his friend 20 years ago?


== cast ==
shammi kapoor as shankar
ameeta as meena
pran as sohan
raj mehra as vishnu
b. m. vyas as gopal / sardar rajpal
sheela vaz as seema
kanu roy
ram avtar as johnny
s. k. singh
anjali devi as kamla
rajendra
m. b. shetty as bhola
s. l. puri


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
tumsa nahin dekha at imdb