twist is a 2021 british crime drama film directed by martin owen and co-produced by noel clarke and jason maza (who also star in the film). the film is a modern day take on charles dickens' 1838 novel, oliver twist. it stars rafferty law, michael caine, noel clarke, lena headey, rita ora and sophie simnett. twist was released on sky cinema on 29 january 2021.


== plot ==
a thief named tom chitling steals an envelope from a safe and escapes from guards but is thrown of a building by an unseen assailant. the envelope is stolen while tom is left to die. 
years before, a boy named oliver lived with his mother molly and their hobby was painting. after molly dies from unknown causes, oliver runs away being scared due to not knowing anyone else. he teaches himself to free run and getting the nickname twist. one day while graffiti spraying on a traffic wardens van, the police chase him and meets dodge and batesey (the artful dodger and charles bates). they escape to their den near the truman brewery where twist meets fagin their carer. the next morning, twist draws a giant graffiti painting on a building. fagin sends red (nancy leigh) to invite twist (who is smitten with her) to his for dinner. meanwhile fagin meets with a friend of his named sikes (bill sikes) revealing she pushed chitling. twist stays with the family and fagin reveals his plan to steal from art dealer dr. crispin losberne who took everything from fagin. they then steal his phone and batesey makes a copy. meanwhile red, as a distraction, asks to be an intern for losberne, so the next day fagin gets the blueprints to losbernes gallery. twist meets sikes and her dog bulls-eye. fagin explains that losberne once went into partnership with a mr. issac solomon.
red plants a small bomb in losbernes bathroom to steal a lost painting by william hogarth. the bomb floods the basement and causes the painting to have to be moved. back at base, twist finds out that red and sikes are a couple upsetting him. at a pub, red appears and sikes goons attack the group while dodge plays ever fallen in love in the jukebox. twist and red escape to a pool where the two kiss and run through the park. twist is arrested by the traffic warden from earlier and is interrogated by detectives brownlow and bedwin who tell him about chitling. twist is let free and gets back to base. batesey is planned to get in a box to steal the painting while its on the move but because hes claustrophobic, twist switches places with him.
losberne finds out about the thieves and this causes twist to fall out the van. sikes picks batesey up and apparently kills him. twist gets back to base and asks what happened to tom chitling? and sikes reveals that she killed tom. fagin gets a plan to break into the auction building. disguised, the group sneak in and fagin plants a gun in losbernes chair. this causes a big evacuation. twist steals the painting and escapes with dodge. batesey, who is still alive, reveals that sikes tried to kill him and meets them at the base. where twist reveals he made a duplicate of the painting and has hidden the real one. he and red escape and sikes shoots fagin. she then chases them to a rooftop and is shot by fagin and falls of a building (ironic after what happened to tom).
a week later, twist meets bedwin and brownlow at a caf and leaves them the envelope and a key. he then calls brownlow hinting that the painting was right next to them the whole time. the envelope reveals the true owners of the painting and the key leads them to a locker owned by losberne (who is arrested) which houses many stolen artwork. fagin is revealed to be issac solomon and leaves with twist in charge. it is also revealed that twist snuck in a photo that he painted and credits it as his mothers. 
the film ends with twist telling the gang to stop stealing and start selling paintings while him and red start a relationship.


== cast ==
rafferty law as oliver twist
michael caine as fagin (issac solomon)
lena headey as sikes
rita ora as dodge
noel clarke as brownlow
franz drameh as batesey
sophie simnett as red (nancy leigh)
david walliams as dr. crispin losberne
jason maza as bedwin
dominic di tommaso as tom chitling
leigh francis as warden bumble


== production ==
it was announced in october 2019 that a new take on the charles dickens novel had begun filming, with raff law cast to play the titular twist. michael caine was cast as fagin, with lena headey and rita ora cast as female renditions of bill sikes and artful dodger, respectively. david walliams, franz drameh and sophie simnett were also cast.the film was produced by pure grass films, along with unstoppable film and television, and first access entertainment film and television.


== release ==
sky cinema distributed the film within the united kingdom, with saban films distributing within north america. originally, the film was set for a 2020 release. however, the film was pushed to 2021. it was released on 29 january.


== reception ==
on rotten tomatoes, it has a 17% score, based on 18 reviews, with an average rating of 3.8/10. peter bradshaw of the guardian gave it two stars out of five, saying that 'the action and comedy are under par'. clarisse loughrey of the independent gave it one out of five stars, writing, 'with its hectic pace and textbook needle drops  the fratellis' "chelsea dagger" makes an appearance  twist never really functions as much more than another guy ritchie homage.'


== references ==


== external links ==
twist at imdb
twist at rotten tomatoes