udayon (transl.creator) is a 2005 indian malayalam-language comedy drama film written and directed by bhadran and produced by maha subair. it stars mohanlal in dual roles: 75-year-old farmer suranadu kunju and his happy-go-lucky son papoyi, laya plays the female lead role and also features manoj k. jayan, kalabhavan mani, innocent, jagathy sreekumar, and salim ghouse in substantial roles. the film features original soundtrack composed by ouseppachan.


== synopsis ==
kunju is so obsessed with his land that he even grabs his sister's share by forging his father's will. though he is known to be stubborn, his love for agriculture is appreciated by his youngest son.


== plot ==
mohanlal plays the double role of 75-year-old suranadu kunju and his son papoyi. kunju thinks that the heartbeat of earth is in soil (agriculture) and not in any other vocation. his beliefs on land and agrarianism is good but his value system that farmers and farming are more important and better than anything else is preposterous. he denies his sons an opportunity to pursue their interests and wants them to be successful in agriculture. which leads to frequent sarcastic quarrels between kunju and his three sons. also when he decides to marry off his daughter to an odd looking but farming enthusiast instead of an educated handsome docctor makes them feel that the father is destroying and spoiling their lives with his ideals, stubbornness and high handedness.
kunju had swindled a large portion of land (5 acres) - which should have been inherited by his sister eechamma (bindu panicker) - by discreetly altering his father's will with the crooked assistance of the family advocate. the deceit is revealed to eechamma - years later - by a severely ailing and remorseful mullassery sreedharan (v. k. sreeraman) (the old advocate). eechamma decides to get back her rightful share through proper leagal channel as her financial situation is in a bad position compared to kunju. eighteen years ago, eecha's husband (a toddy shop owner) committed suicide due to dire financial crisis - after beseechingly requesting kunju for help, which the latter denied owing to his miserly behaviour. 
mathan (kalabhavan mani), eecha's eldest son - known as jcb for owning and operating a bulldozer for his livelihood - and his villainous brother in law, a local tamil village chieftain and an arbitrator adds a twist as he interferes in the family property dispute. all said and done the sister doesn't want evil to her brother and her younger son the mute also doesn't want. papoyi tries to save things but never has luck. ultimately, kunju's youngest son is used as a bait to coerce for the transfer of property. at last, amidst the chaos, ponnan is killed and kunju kills the villainous brother in law perumal (salim ghouse). and gives the family property keys to eecha and the patriarch stick to papoyi after being arrested and taken to the prison. while leaving his house with the police, kunju - an impassive individual - wails loudly, repenting his misdeeds.


== cast ==
mohanlal as shooranad kunju (kunjipapa) and shooranad papoyi, a farmer and his second son
jagathy sreekumar	as shavappetty thoma, first son of ichamma
manoj k. jayan as pottan, youngest son of ichamma
laya as maya
innocent	as rarichan, first son of kunju
kalabhavan mani as mathan, second son of ichamma
siddique	as mammali
kuku paremeswaran as malli
shammi thilakan as s.i itti
bheeman raghu as police
mohan jose as manthodi joppan
sadiq as pappoy's friend
kulappulli leela as bullet kuttiyamma
rajan p. dev as chetti
m. r. gopakumar as chackochi, ichamma's husband
idavela babu as itti, third son of kunju
salim ghouse as perumal
nassar as unni vaidyan
bindu panicker as ichamma
rekha
sukanya	as susiemol, only daughter of kunju
ambika mohan as rarichan's wife
v. k. sreeraman as advocate sreedharan
kochu preman as kangaroo, bus conductor
vinayakan as thoma's helper
valsala menon
kalpana as kunjujamma
unnikrishnan namboothiri as priest
master adarsh as ponnan, youngest son of kunju
baby akshai as son of kuku paremeswaran
vinod therattil as person helping papoyi during bus accident


== production ==
jyothika was offered to act as lead actress with mohanlal. but she could not do it due to her busy schedules in tamil. she was later replaced by telugu actress laya.


== soundtrack ==
the film features original soundtrack composed by ouseppachan.


=== track listing ===


== release ==
the film released on 15 july 2005, and became a huge disaster in box office, also getting negative reviews from the critics.


== references ==


== external links ==
udayon at imdb