ullathai allitha (transl.give me the heart) is a 1996 indian tamil-language comedy film directed by sundar c. the film starred karthik, rambha, and goundamani in the lead roles, while manivannan, jaiganesh, senthil, and jyothi meena play supporting roles. the film's score and soundtrack are composed by sirpi. the film released on 15 january 1996 and received positive reviews from the critics and audience. the film was a blockbuster hit at the box office. the movie is heavily inspired by the hindi film andaz apna apna and partially by the tamil movie sabaash meena. it was remade in telugu as veedevadandi babu and in kannada as galate aliyandru.


== plot ==
raja is the only son of retired military officer col. chandrasekhar, who, even though being very rich, raises his son very strictly. chandrasekhar decides to get raja married to his long time friend viswanathan's daughter indhu. vishwanathan is one of the richest men in ooty and is a tea estate owner. raja misunderstands another girl as indhu (chandrasekhar's nephew shankar interchanged indhu's photo with another girl) and decides to run away from house to escape from the wedding. unknown to chandrasekhar, shankar plans to grab chandrasekhar's properties by triggering raja to leave the house.
raja runs away and reaches ooty, where he meets con artist vasu, and despite initial setbacks both become friends. one day, raja sees indhu in ooty and gets attracted towards her, not knowing that she was the girl fixed for him by his father. raja follows indhu and finds her home. later raja secures a driver job in viswanathan's home to woo indhu.
raja gives his family ring to vasu to prevent him from disclosing the truth to viswanathan, but viswanathan misunderstands that vasu is chandrasekhar's son as he wears the ring now. viswanathan brings vasu to his home and introduces him as indhu's fianc. one day, a gang tries to attack vasu, but he is saved by raja, which makes him understand that there is someone looking out to kill him, so raja decides to remain in the identity of a driver to unearth the reason behind the goons trying to attack him.
viswanathan informs chandrasekhar that his son is found but asks him not to come immediately to see him as he does not like his father. meanwhile, at ooty, raja tries to impress indhu, while vasu is attracted towards viswanathan's personal secretary meena. slowly love blossoms between indhu and raja. suddenly, chandrseakhar comes to ooty to viswanathan's home to meet raja. now, a problem erupts as raja is in the disguise of a driver. both raja and vasu try to manage by roaming together for a few days so that they can convince both viswanathan and chandrasekhar.
meanwhile, shankar gets furious upon knowing that raja is found. he befriends kasinathan, who is viswanathan's twin brother. however, kasinathan is a criminal who has just been released from jail. they kidnap viswanathan, and now, kasinathan comes to viswanathan's place so that he can enjoy all the properties and wealth. doubt erupts for raja and vasu upon seeing kasinathan as he spends money lavishly, compared to viswanathan, who is very stingy.
raja and vasu secretly follow kasinathan and finds the whereabouts of viswanathan and the plan behind his kidnap. raja is shocked to see his cousin shankar there as he is the master brain behind all the events. a hilarious fight follows, where in the end, shankar and kasinathan get arrested. it is also revealed that raja is the son of chandrasekhar. raja unites with indhu, while vasu unites with meena.


== cast ==
karthik as raja
rambha as indhu
goundamani as vasu
manivannan as viswanathan and kasinathan
jaiganesh as chandrasekar
senthil as viswanathan's manager
pandu as viswanathan's manager
jyothi meena as meena
kazan khan as shankar
vichu vishwanath as chandrasekar's manager
k. selva bharathy
karuppu subbiah as seth


== production ==
during the making of the film, there was a misunderstanding and subsequent falling out between the lead actress rambha and the producer of the film. for the filming of the song "azhagiya laila", rambha wore different dresses for almost every scene, in addition to wigs.


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by sirpy and lyrics were written by pazhani bharathi. all the songs from this film were plagiarised from various sources; "azhagiya laila" is based on "ahla ma feki" by hisham abbas, "i love you" is based on another abbas song "wana amel eih", "adi anarkali" is based on "in the summertime" by mungo jerry, "chittu chittu kuruvikku" is based on the pakistani folk song "laung gawacha" and "mama nee mama" is based on "kinna sohna tainu" by nusrat fateh ali khan.


== release ==
the film which was released alongside another karthik starrer kizhakku mugam (1996) and ullathai allitha was a success at box-office. balaji wrote:" it stands out in that every aspect of it, be it the romance or the fights, has been handled with an eye on comedy and there is not a single moment of emotions or sentiments".the film achieved success after receiving good word-of-mouth reviews from audiences. after a slow start at the box office, the songs' success on television prompted audiences to visit cinemas.


== legacy ==
the success of the film paved way for numerous comedy films. the film made sundar c. as one of the most sought directors. rambha gained popularity through this film and became one of the leading heroines. the film also made manivannan as one of the famous comedians. karthik and goundamani became one of the famous comic pairs from the film, the pair went on to do many films. the success of the film led sundar c. to collaborate with karthik in subsequent projects - mettukudi (1996), unakkaga ellam unakkaga (1999) and azhagana naatkal (2001). azhagana naatkal was compared by critics with ullathai allitha due to its similarity in sequences and characterisations.sundar c. himself listed it as one of the favourite films he had directed. vimal who acted in director's kalakalappu (2012) recalled that he had watched this film during his schooldays. subha j. rao and k. jeshi of the hindu placed the film in league with other successful comedy films like kadhalikka neramillai (1964), thillu mullu (1981) and michael madana kama rajan (1990).


== references ==


== external links ==
ullathai allitha at imdb