under california stars  is a 1948 american trucolor western film directed by william witney and starring roy rogers, jane frazee and andy devine. the film was shot in trucolor. after returning from hollywood after his tenth anniversary in films to his ranch, rogers tackles a gang who kidnap his horse trigger and hold it to ransom.
this film is now in the public domain.


== plot ==
roy has just finished his latest film and leaves for his ranch where be will be broadcasting a show celebrating his tenth year in movies. when roy and trigger arrive at his ranch he finds cookie has hired his relatives. caroline, the only relative that doesn't have a strong resemblance to cookie, is the horse trainer. bob tells roy a gang of men are hunting range horses. roy puts a stop to hunting 
on his land. pop decides there's money in kidnapping trigger and demands a $100,000 ransom. mcfarland's stepson, ted, and his dog tramp, run away and is found hiding in roy's barn. a trap is set to catch the kidnappers ranch.


== cast ==
roy rogers as roy rogers
trigger as trigger, roy's horse
jane frazee as caroline bullfincher
andy devine as cookie bullfincher / alf bullfincher
george lloyd as pop jordan
wade crosby as lige mcfarland
michael chapin as ted carver
house peters jr. as henchman ed
steve clark as sheriff
joseph a. garro as john the banker
paul power as movie director paul
john wald  as wyx radio announcer
bob nolan as bob
sons of the pioneers as musicians, ranch hands


== soundtrack ==
roy rogers, jane frazee and the sons of the pioneers - "under california stars" (written by jack elliott)
andy devine and the sons of the pioneers - "rogers, king of the cowboys" (written by jack elliott)
roy rogers and the sons of the pioneers - "dust" (written by johnny marvin)
sons of the pioneers - "serenade to a coyote" (written by andy parker)
roy rogers and the sons of the pioneers - "little saddle pal" (written by jack elliott)


== see also ==
public domain film
list of american films of 1948
list of films in the public domain in the united states


== external links ==
 media related to under california stars at wikimedia commons

under california stars at imdb
under california stars is available for free download at the internet archive