united 93 is a 2006 docudrama thriller film written, co-produced, and directed by paul greengrass. the film chronicles the events aboard united airlines flight 93, which was hijacked during the september 11 attacks of 2001.
the film attempts to recount the hijacking and subsequent events in the flight with as much veracity as possible (there is a disclaimer that some imagination had to be used) and in real time (from the flight's takeoff). according to the filmmakers, the film was made with the cooperation of all of the passengers' families.united 93 premiered on april 26, 2006, at the tribeca film festival in new york city, a festival founded to celebrate new york city as a major filmmaking center and to contribute towards the long-term recovery of lower manhattan. several family members of the passengers aboard the flight attended the premiere to show their support.
the film opened in north america on april 28, 2006, to critical acclaim. ten percent of the gross income from the three-day opening weekend was promised toward a donation to create a memorial for the flight 93 victims. the total gross intake of united 93 was $31.4 million in the united states, and $76.3 million worldwide. the film also received two academy award nominations, including best director for greengrass.


== plot ==
on the morning of september 11, 2001, four al-qaeda terrorists, ziad jarrah, saeed al-ghamdi, ahmed al-nami and ahmed al-haznawi, pray in their hotel room, before driving to newark international airport to board united airlines flight 93, planning to hijack the plane and crash it into the united states capitol as part of the attacks planned for the day. among the passengers are tom burnett, mark bingham, todd beamer, jeremy glick, richard guadagno, louis j. nacke ii, william joseph cashman, and patrick joseph driscoll. before borading, jarrah calls his girlfriend in germany to say he loves her.
after a slight delay, flight 93, piloted by captain jason dahl and first officer leroy homer, takes off. onboard flight 93, jarrah fails to give the signal to start the hijacking. via a message transmitted to the cockpit, dahl and homer are notified of american airlines flight 11 united airlines flight 175 crashing into one world trade center and two world trade centre. after nami urges jarrah to take action, an impatient al-haznawi assembles a bomb in the airplane bathroom and after returning to his seat, ghamdi grabs flight purser deborah welsh at knife point. passenger mark rothenberg is mortally wounded by haznawi and the first-class passengers are forced to the back of the plane in a panic. ghamdi stabs homer who collapses and dies. dahl sends out a mayday call but is mortally wounded. after dragging the dying dahl out, ghamdi kills welsh. taking the plane's controls, jarrah changes its course to their intended target. nami berates lauren grandcolas for trying to help the dying rothenberg. due to messages being sent by united airlines to the cockpit, they learn that the world trade centre attack was carried out successfully. ghamdi goes out to share the news with haznawi and nami and sluices blood off his hands with a bottle of spring water.
flight attendant sandra bradshaw observes the bodies of the pilots and welsh. after overhearing this, passengers soon learn from family members via airphone of the attacks as well as american airlines flight 77 crashing into the pentagon. burnett decides to organize a revolt against the hijackers, to retake the plane, with the help of bingham, bradshaw and fa ceecee lyles, learning that passenger donald greene has a license to pilot small planes and passenger andrew garcia is a former air traffic controller. seeing the gathering, haznawi and nami become agitated, realising they may not be able to keep the passengers under control for long. nami informs al-ghamdi and jarrah in the cockpit. jarrah and ghamdi begin to panic, seeing that they are twenty minutes away from their target, and realising the passengers might thwart their plans. after agreeing to fight back, the male, able-bodied passengers go to the back of the plane with the stewardesses and arm themselves. the remaining passengers pray, and make final phone calls to their families. passenger christian adams, attempting to conseal appeasement, is restrained and shushed by passengers. the revolt begins. jeremy glick leads the charge towards a stunned haznawi, who is quickly subdued and beaten by glick and nacke, while bingham crushes his skull with a fire extinguisher, killing him. nacke snatches the bomb, revealing it to be a fake. alerted by al-nami, jarrah rocks the plane violently to throw the passengers off balance, while al-nami tries to hold off the passengers, with the use of a serving cart, mace and a fire extinguisher; the passengers push the cart back into him and a scared nami is tackled and after gouging out his eyes, glick snaps nami's neck, killing him. the passengers then batter the cart against the cockpit door. a terrified jarrah and ghamdi realize they would fail in their mission, and despite ghamdi's efforts to hold against the door and use the axe to frighten the passengers, the passengers batter the door enough to rip it off its hinges. jarrah puts the plane into a steep dive, just as the passengers storm the cockpit, and struggle fiercely with ghamdi and jarrah. ghamdi tries to protect jarrah but the passengers overpower him, as burnett begins choking out jarrah. as the passengers and hijackers wrestle for control, the aircraft inverts and crashes into a shanksville field, killing everyone aboard.


== cast ==

additionally, several people portray themselves in the film, including thomas roberts, ben sliney, tobin miller, rich sullivan, tony smith, james fox, shawna fox, jeremy powell, curt applegate, greg callahan, and rick tepper.


== production ==
the film was the first hollywood feature to draw its narrative directly from the september 11 attacks of 2001. passengers were portrayed in the film mostly by professional but relatively unknown actors. (tom burnett, for instance, is played by christian clemenson, who has since appeared on boston legal and csi: miami). some participants in the real-life events played themselves, notably faa operations manager ben sliney.
the dialogue, which was mostly improvised during rehearsals greengrass held with the cast, was based on face-to-face interviews between actors and the relatives of those they portrayed. almost none of the passengers in the film are referred to by their names. their identities remain anonymous, emphasizing the co-operation between the passengers rather than any individual heroics (as well as recognizing the fact that strangers on an airplane would not know each other's names).
filming took place from october until december 2005, on a 20-year-old reclaimed boeing 757 formerly operated by mytravel airways, at pinewood studios near london. the cockpit was built by flightdeck solutions. the location was chosen both for its financial incentives and to shield actors from unwanted public scrutiny they might have received in the united states. action was filmed with handheld cameras, chosen for their versatility on the close-quarters sets and to create a sense of immediacy. exterior airport sequences were shot on location at newark liberty international airport, while interiors were shot back in england at london stansted airport. a few scenes were also shot in washington, d.c. and boston. additionally, an opening sequence set in afghanistan was shot in morocco, but it was cut from the film before release.the film was given an r rating by the motion picture association of america for "language, and some intense sequences of terror and violence".  the film was released in the united states on april 28, 2006, and opened second in the weekend box office behind rv, but it netted a slightly higher per-screen average.initial screenings ended with the closing credits line "america's war on terror had begun". this was replaced in the release version with "dedicated to the memory of all those who lost their lives on september 11, 2001".after trailers for the film began circulating in cinemas, there were calls for universal studios to pull them, due to the upset and surprise caused to some audience members. universal did not heed that call, although one theatre in manhattan pulled the trailer after audience complaints.the iraqi-born, london-based actor lewis alsamari, who plays hijacker saeed al-ghamdi, was reportedly denied a visa by united states immigration authorities when he applied to visit new york city to attend the premiere, despite having already been granted asylum in the united kingdom since the 1990s. the reason reported to have been given was that he had once been a conscripted member of the iraqi army  although this was also the grounds for his refugee status after his desertion in 1993. other sources say that he applied late for his visa and that it was not denied.


== historical accuracy ==

it is unknown why the hijackers waited 46 minutes after takeoff to start the hijacking; jarrah is portrayed as hesitant in the film, and he was the one terrorist who had doubts over the attacks. the hijackers' target isn't certain either, but it's most commonly assumed to be either the united states capitol (as depicted in the film) or the white house in washington, d.c.the cockpit voice recorder tape from united flight 93 has never been made public; however, a transcript was made public after the film was completed, shedding more light on what actually happened in the final 30 minutes before the plane crashed. some parts contradict the filmmakers' choices in terms of some dialogue and specific aspects of the event. for example, the pilots, jason dahl and leroy homer jr., are shown in the film being killed by the terrorists immediately during the hijacking. some statements made by the terrorists in the cockpit voice recorder transcript, as well as moans heard in the background inside the cockpit, raised doubts that both pilots were dead before the plane crashed; however, other documentary evidence from the 9/11 commission report indicates that at least one passenger reported in a cell phone call seeing two bodies, possibly the pilots, lying dead on the floor outside the cockpit after the hijacking.marion r. britton is seen handing her mobile to fellow passenger honor elizabeth wainio so she can call her mother. it was actually lauren grandcolas that handed waino her phone.there is some controversy between some of the family members of the passengers and the investigative officials as to whether the passengers managed to breach the cockpit before the plane crashed. the 9/11 commission report concluded that "the hijackers remained at the controls but must have judged that the passengers were only seconds from overcoming them". however, many of the passengers' family members, having heard the audio recordings, believe that the passengers did breach the cockpit and struggled with the hijackers for control of the yoke (which the movie depicts).


=== portrayal of christian adams ===
the film has been criticized for its portrayal of german passenger christian adams, who is the only passenger portrayed as counseling appeasement, despite the absence of any evidence that he did so. it was also reported that adams's widow did not cooperate with the filmmakers because it was too emotionally painful. erich redman, who portrayed adams in the film, has stated he did not intend to portray adams as cowardly but as a man who "never made rash decisions and everything he did was always well-considered".


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
united 93 was one of the most critically acclaimed films of 2006. james berardinelli, roger ebert, michael medved, and peter travers  all awarded it full marks on their rating scales, with ebert calling the film "masterful and heartbreaking" and saying that it "does honor to the memory of the victims". travers termed it "one of the most moving films of the year", in rolling stone. the film holds a 90% "fresh" rating on rotten tomatoes based on 212 reviews, and an average rating of 8.23/10, with the consensus: "potent and sobering, united 93 treats the subject matter with respect, never resorting to hollywood aggrandizement."the film has a score of 90 on metacritic, where it appears on 39 critics' top 10 lists, more than any other 2006 film on the site, (although the 2006 film with the highest average score on the site is the re-released 1969 film army of shadows). the film was ranked #1 on 47 lists (the most of any 2006 film).at the website movie city news, which ranks 250 critics' lists and awards points for list-placement, united 93 ranks as the number one film of 2006 with a score of 917.5 points.
the film has been cited as a favorite by filmmaker john waters, who presented it as his annual selection within the 2010 maryland film festival.


=== top 10 lists ===
only two films (the departed and the queen) appeared on more top 10 lists of the best films of 2006 than united 93, and no film received more #1 mentions:

joe morgenstern of the wall street journal and steven rea of the philadelphia inquirer named it among the top ten best films of 2006.


=== accolades ===
united 93 received numerous awards and nominations from film critics and guilds. ultimately, the film received two academy award nominations, including best director, at the 79th academy awards, and six bafta award nominations, including best british film, at the 60th british academy film awards, winning two for best director and best film editing.


== home media ==
united 93 was released to dvd on september 5, 2006, in both widescreen and fullscreen. also released was a 2-disc special limited edition in widescreen. a blu-ray disc version was released on september 6, 2011. a second blu-ray release from universal studios for the film was released on june 5, 2012, as a part of universal's universal 100th anniversary releases. this version included the same blu-ray disc (same transfer and same bonus features) found in the first 2011 release in addition to a dvd and digital copy included in the pack with a brand-new sleeve that was not available with the previous release. both blu-ray disc sets for the film are region free.


== see also ==
list of cultural references to the september 11 attacks
united 300
world trade center (film)


== references ==


== further reading ==
greengrass, paul (2006). united 93: the shooting script. newmarket shooting script. new york: newmarket press. isbn 978-1557047526.


== external links ==
official website
united 93 at imdb
united 93 at rotten tomatoes
united 93 at metacritic
united 93 at box office mojo
united 93 at reelfaces
"united 93". archived from the original on january 10, 2006. retrieved january 6, 2006.
investigating united 93: researching and honoring a catastrophe: part i by uri lessing
investigating united 93: researching and honoring a catastrophe: part ii by uri lessing
interview with andrew bernstein
german 9/11 victim defamed in united 93  review focusing on the stereotyping and politics
hijacking the hijacking, the problem with the united 93 films by ron rosenbaum, on slate.com