unnidathil ennai koduthen (transl.i gave myself to you) is a 1998 indian tamil-language romantic drama film written and directed by vikraman. it stars karthik and roja, with ajith kumar, ramesh khanna, moulee, sathyapriya, fathima babu, and madhan bob in supporting roles. it was karthik's 100th film. the film released on august 1998 and won critical acclaim and commercial success at the box office.


== plot ==
selvam (karthik) and his friend bhaskar (ramesh khanna) are petty thieves, who live their life stealing stuff from people. one day, they are assigned a job to steal a ganesh idol from the temple, for a man who had just moved into a new house, citing prosperity as a reason. the friends succeed in stealing the idol but are spotted by the people who start chasing them. they hide in a house and encounter radha (roja). radha is a maid in the house and is looking after the owners 3 children while the adults are away on pilgrimage tour. radha and the kids lock the two of them in a room and order them to do stuff for 3 days. radha, while spending time alone in the house with the guys, realise that they are not bad after all and develops a soft corner for selvam and he in return, falls for her. the guys are released after 3 days, the day the owners are to return. 
bhaskar steals radhas handbag which contains her diary. selvam reads the diary and finds out that radha is the illegitimate daughter of vishwanathan (moulee). after her mothers death, radha meets her father who accepts her as his daughter but has to bring her into the house as a maid. vishwanathans wife (sathyapriya and her sister (fathima babu) take an instant dislike for radha. she treats her with utter disgust and blames her for the tiniest of the things. vishwanathan plans to arrange the marriage between sanjay (ajith kumar), his brother-in-law and radha. but sanjay says that he would have to think about it and asks for 3 months time. radha waits for his reply. selvam, after reading her diary, feels pity on her and tries to change his ways by working responsibly after radhas advice. he also hides his feelings for her. 
after returning from the trip, vishwanathans wife finds out a diamond necklace is missing. when looking for it, she finds a cigarette bud in one of the drawers and scolds radha. she chases her out. selvam who comes to return her bag, finds out and helps her to accommodate in a hostel. he does many petty works to pay the hostel fees and help radha. one day, selvam finds about radhas singing talent and tries to help her move on with it. he encounters music director gangai amaran late one night and helps him repair his car. in return, he asks the director to help radha out. radha, after singing a few songs, becomes successful in her singing career and becomes rich. she stays in her bungalow with selvam and bhaskar. 
during an interview, radha refrains from saying her fathers name. upset, vishwanathan reveals that he is the father. his wife, looking at radhas money, accepts radha as her daughter as well. they come to stay at her house. vishwanathans wife does not like selvam and bhaskar staying with them. they plan the wedding of sanjay and radha, as sanjay had accepted to marry radha, long time back. when radha had gone out of town with sanjay, to receive an award, vishwanathans wife and sister-in-law stage a drama that selvam stole money and chase him and bhaskar out. radha comes back and is shocked. she finds selvams diary in his room and learns about his love for her.  
during an award ceremony, radha reveals that the reason for her success is not her family but selvam and she had fallen in love with him. she also tells her desire to marry him. selvam who had arrived there to drop a passenger, sees it and is called upon the stage when radha sees him in a tv. in a flashback, it is shown that radha had informed sanjay and vishwanathan about her love for selvam and how sanjay had accepted it. selvam and radha leave the place hand in hand.


== cast ==
special appearances in "vaanambadiyin" song
gangai amaran
sarathkumar
k. s. ravikumar
khushbu
s. a .rajkumar
deva


== production ==
after having a 1996 success with the karthik film gokulathil seethai, lakshmi movie makers began their sixth production and launched a film with director vikraman in february 1997. unnidathil ennai koduthen was set to feature vijay in the lead role, whom vikraman worked with in poove unakkaga, but production delays meant that the actor was replaced by karthik. meena also had to reject an offer to star in the leading female role due to date problems. swathi was initially approached to appear in a single song sequence for the film, but her refusal led to anusha being chosen.ajith later revealed that his role in the film was initially supposed to be a full length role but the character underwent changes after the film started. he continued to play his part in the film due to his admiration for his co-actor, karthik. the success of unnidathil ennai koduthen later led to karthik making a guest appearance in the ajith film anantha poongatre.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of the film was composed by s. a. rajkumar, who also played a cameo as himself in the film alongside the music directors gangai amaren and deva. "edho oru paattu" was later used in the hindi film mann as "chaha hai tujhko".


== release ==
the film released on 15 august 1998 and was a commercial successful at the box office for the producers, lakshmi movie makers in open month.  the film gave a fresh lease in their careers to the lead pair, while vikraman's work won him further recognition. ramesh khanna, after his new gained recognition, was able to find a financier to make his first film as a director, thodarum. indolink.com rated the film amongst the "best of 1998", reporting that the film ran over 200 days in theatres across tamil nadu.
indolink.com gave the film an above average review mentioning that "all the actors perform their part well. the story places the characters in situations where they behave predictably or in some cases where they are not true to themselves. other than that minor snitch, the movie is quite entertaining".


== awards ==


== remakes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
unnidathil ennai koduthen at imdb