up the front is a 1972 british comedy film directed by bob kellett and starring frankie howerd, bill fraser, and hermione baddeley.  it is the third film spin-off from the television series up pompeii! (the previous films being up the chastity belt set in the middle ages which followed on from the up pompeii film). the plot concerns lurk (a descendant of the slave lurcio in up pompeii), a coward who is hypnotised into bravery.


== plot ==
set during world war i, lurk, a lowly servant in the household of lord and lady twithampton (william mervyn and linda gray), is hypnotised by the great vincento (stanley holloway) and travels to the western front to 'save england'. lurk is inspired to bravery, and upon receiving the german master plan for the entire war, which has through an unlikely series of events been tattooed onto his posterior, is pursued across france by german intelligence. after breaking into the british military headquarters to deliver the plans into the hands of general burke (robert coote), he is confronted by the sensuous german spy mata hari (zsa zsa gabor). after foiling mata hari's scheme to relieve him of the plan, a hilarious scene develops in which he is pursued by the nefarious von gutz (lance percival) and his henchmen donner and blitzen (gertan klauber and stanley lebor). accompanied by the can-can, performed by the famous buttercup girls, lurk is pursued around the allied headquarters.  finally, disguised as a tree, he is able to present the plans to general burke, to the famous line:

general burke: "lurk, bend down."
lurk: "i thought you'd never ask!"

having successfully delivered the plans into the hands of british intelligence, lurk receives a medal of honour and a promotion. he is therefore able to win the love of his beloved fanny (madeline smith) and defeat the machinations of the wicked sgt. major groping (bill fraser).


== cast ==
frankie howerd as lurk
bill fraser as groping
zsa zsa gabor as mata hari
stanley holloway as the great vincento
hermione baddeley as monique
robert coote as general burke
lance percival as von gutz
dora bryan as cora crumpington
william mervyn as lord twithampton
linda gray as lady twithampton
jonathan cecil as captain nigel phipps fortescue
madeline smith as fanny
percy herbert as corporal lovechild
peter bull as general von kobler
vernon dobtcheff as muller
gertan klauber as donner
stanley lebor as blitzen
michael brennan as m.p.
harvey hall as m.p.
david battley as midgeley the cook
derek griffiths as el puncturo
mike grady as newsboy
bob hoskins as recruiting sergeant
robert gillespie as french officer
patricia quinn as magda (mata hari's maid)
toni palmer as 1st buttercup girl
leena skoog as nurse


=== cast notes ===
bob hoskins' brief appearance in the film, in the role of a recruiting sergeant, represents the actor's mainstream debut.


== critical reception ==
the new york times wrote, "the laughs come fast and furious when howerd finds himself the recipient of the enemy's war plans--tattooed on his tush." tv guide called the film "inane nonsense."


== references ==


== external links ==
up the front at imdb