urumbukal urangarilla (english: ants don't sleep) is a 2015 indian malayalam comedy thriller film written and directed by jiju asokan. it features chemban vinod jose, vinay forrt, ananya, sudheer karamana, aju varghese, innocent, kalabhavan shajon, sreejith ravi, sunil sukhada, musthafa, vanitha krishnachandran, janakai krishnan and thesni khan. the film was released on 19 september 2015 to positive reviews from critics.


== plot ==
the story of the film is based on thieves. a young man named manoj (vinay forrt) joins with a theft guru kelu ashan (sudheer karamana), to learn the art. however, kelu ashan is old and retired so he introduces him to one of his students benny (chemban vinod jose) to be trained in the art of robbery. benny trains him well. after benny was caught, he meets kelu ashan again, who teaches him the "science of theft". manoj eventually gets caught. he is sent to jail, where he meets benny. the pith of the story starts to unravel then. manoj  was actually in search of a thief, named carlos (kalabhavan shajohn) who has murdered his parents when he was abroad. his intention to become a thief and to get in to jail (as he learned carlos was also in jail, from kelu ashan), was with this objective. he finds the thief who has murdered his parents. he then hatches a plan, traps the thief and kills him viciously by slathering sugar solution all over his body and scattering ants. later the young man starts an old age home and his co-thieves are shown living happily.


== cast ==
chemban vinod jose as benny
vinay forrt as manoj
innocent as madhavan nair
sudheer karamana as kelu aasan
vanitha krishnachandran as radha
ananya as sheela
aju varghese as babukuttan
musthafa as balu
kalabhavan shajon as carlos
thesni khan as rosely
janaki krishnan as deepa
sreejith ravi as choodan rajappan
santhosh keezhattoor as davis
vettukili prakash as bhaskaran
manju sunichan as janamma
sasankan mayyanad
lakshmipriya as anitha (cameo)
pradeep kottayam as sulu's husband (cameo)


== reception ==
sify gave the verdict "above average" and said "urumbukal urangarilla may not offer many surprises and may not be that great for a discerning viewer. but even then this one has its moments for sure and ends up as a decent entertainer".metromatinee.com wrote "urumbukal urangarilla is nicely executed and technically the movie stands on its feet", also added "urumbukal urangarilla is a decent enough effort that engages off and on. there is some well worked out humour and if some avoidable glitches weren't there this one would have endeared even better to the audience".indiaglitz.com rated 2.5 out of 5 stars and wrote "'urumbukal urangarilla' intends to entertain. there are occasions where things go flat and there is a lull in the narrative. parts of second half were so. but the movie picked up speed towards the climax and overall feel tended towards being impressive".nowrunning.com rated 2.5 out of 6 stars and said "urumbukal urangarilla is original and creative, and comes across as an appealing cinematic disquisition on a population that apparently never sleeps. it's a quirky , comic film that provides plenty of silly, and yet inventive fun".


== music ==
the music was scored by gopi sunder and tracks were penned by hari narayanan.


== references ==


== external links ==
urumbukal urangarilla at imdb
official website 
official facebook page