uyyala jampala is a 2013 indian telugu-language film directed by virinchi varma, produced by ram mohan p and akkineni nagarjuna under sunshine cinema in association with annapurna studios, starring avika gor and raj tarun.uyyala jampala received positive reviews from critics who appreciated the performances and technical aspects of the film. tarun and gor won best male debut and best female debut respectively at the 3rd south indian international movie awards.


== plot ==
the film is narrated by the protagonist, soori. he wants to confess his love for his cousin umadevi. soori and umadevi have quarreled since childhood. umadevi is the daughter of rangaraju, the younger brother of soori's mother. rangaraju. her family lives in a mansion, while soori and his widowed mother live in a small house beside the mansion. soori maintains fish ponds near the village. his friend kodanda is a techie and gossip. a second friend vasu is a gullible person who always has a "be positive" attitude. a local belle sunitha is infatuated with soori, and is umadevi's close friend. to tease umadevi, soori flirts with sunitha.
meanwhile, umadevi falls in love with a techie parthu. when soori observes her neglecting him, he gets suspicious and he and vasu follow umadevi and find her with parthu. they learn that parthu is a mechanic who works in the nearby town's hero motorcorp outlet. soori calls parthu and tells him that he wants to purchase the bike parthu uses. after a test drive, soori beats up parthu. the wounded parthu asks umadevi to elope with him as parthu's father is trying to arrange a marriage for him. when umadevi expresses her fear, parthu announces that he would kill himself if she refuses him, so she agrees.
after packing her dresses, gifts presented by parthu, and her ornaments, umadevi escapes from her house that night and boards a bus with parthu. rangaraju creates havoc in his house, and soori finds out with the help of sunitha that umadevi is in tuni, a major town in east godavari district. when parthu and umadevi exit the bus, parthu's friends try to kidnap her and parthu tries to snatch her ornaments. soori comes with kodanda and vasu and rescues umadevi. umadevi realizes that parthu was trapping her when soori admits with a grin that the love letter written by parthu for uma is of hen's blood, but not his own. in a rage uma beats him.
umadevi stays at soori's house as her father is angry with her. she learns from her aunt about true love. she realizes that suri has true love for her because he pays for pani puri for uma, buys her a phone, stops her marriage with one of his friends as she asked, and accepts the blame.
later, umadevi tells sunitha that suri loves her, and not sunith. as suri stops uma's marriage, her angry father forbids her to come into his house. suri declares that he will find a perfect match for uma. uma's father was happy when suri arranged uma's marriage with a businessman who is a childhood classmate who had many crushes on uma.
suri's mother is not interested in this marriage. she shouts at him and says that he will miss uma only after her marriage which makes suri realize his feelings for umadevi. further, umadevi's actions make suri believe that she is also in love with him, but he stays quiet. on the day before marriage, uma thanks suri for all the beautiful memories, and for all his help and tearfully they agree that he will not attend the marriage. seeing this, uma adds sleeping pills in the lassi and later decides to confess her feelings to suri, as shown at the beginning of the movie. he sees uma running towards him. she explains that her marriage has been stopped. he asks why. she discloses that she mixed pills in the lassi and gave it to the groom, which causes suri to laugh. when asked why he was running towards the house, he explains that he cannot live without her. they reconcile and marry with the consent of their parents.


== cast ==
raj tarun as soori
avika gor as uma devi
punarnavi bhupalam as sunita
kireeti damaraju as murali
nikhil devadula as young soori
pranavi manukonda as young uma devi
peela gangadhar as vasu
alluri hanuma as kodanda
shashank srivatsavaya as pardhu


== soundtrack ==
sunny m.r. composed the music.


== critical reception ==
uyyala jampala received positive reviews. suresh kavirayani of deccan chronicle wrote: "the movie impresses despite having a predictable plot, with good dialogues, a reasonable length and amazing cinematography." kavirayani added that, "full marks to director virinchi varma for telling such a touching tale of delicate romance set against a beautiful rural backdrop, with debutante actor raj tarun and avika gor."


== remake ==
the film was remade in kannada as krishna-rukku and in bengali as parbona ami chartey tokey.


== references ==


== external links ==
uyyala jampala at imdb