vajrakaya is a 2015 indian kannada action film directed by harsha. it stars shiva rajkumar, nabha natesh and karunya ram in the lead roles, with avinash, ravi kale and suman as supporting cast.


== plot ==
viraj (shivarajkumar) is an adopted kid, adopted at a young age. he falls in love with geetha (shubra aiyappa), daughter of viraj's father's friend. viraj's father invites geetha's family for his wedding anniversary and proposes his son's marriage with her. but geetha's father rejects the proposal since viraj is an adopted kid. viraj's father gets a heart attack and gets admitted to the hospital. after he becomes conscious, he tells viraj that he is not an orphan and has a family with his mother (jayasudha) and grandfather (madhu guruswamy) still being alive. viraj then embarks on a journey in search of his mother, to the heartless kingdom of his grandfather. he meets and saves a girl nandini (karunya ram). she takes him to the ruthless village of his grandfather. there falls for 'pataka' parvathi (nabha natesh), his uncle's daughter. after some silly scenes she proposes to him which he accepts. but one day pataka's father (ravi kale) kidnaps and tries to kill nandini since she was close to viraj. but he saves her. pataka tells him that they are looking a groom for her and asks him to elope with her but he refuses. his grandfather comes to know about it and tries to kill him. his mother reveals that she already knew that he is her son. pataka and his mother beg his grandfather to live him. but he says pataka's father to kill viraj. he says that he can kill his son-in-law (suman) and see his daughter widowed but he cannot. his grandfather soon accepts him. the film ends as the family unites and nandini feels happy for him.


== cast ==


== production ==
harsha collaborated with shiva rajkumar for the second time following the success of their previous venture bhajarangi (2013). filming for vajrakaya began in june 2014. filming of certain sequences took place in italy. song sequences in the film featured cameo appearances of actors of south indian cinema such as ravichandran, sivakarthikeyan, dileep and ravi teja.


== soundtrack ==
arjun janya, scoring for his 50th feature film, composed the film's background score and music for its soundtrack. the soundtrack features tracks sung by actors dhanush, sharan. the album consists of six tracks. it was released on 28 april 2015, in bangalore.
nam cinema rated the album 3.5 stars out of 5  the track "no problem" was received as well. the hindu wrote, "dhanush delivers the cool, simple tune effortlessly, even as arjun adorns it with a neat harmonica sound now identified as that harris jayaraj sound."


== critical reception ==
times of india wrote "a harsha and shivarajkumar had previously teamed up for the bhajarangi, which was a treat for the fans. their second collaboration doesn't disappoint either. harsha, using tried and tested elements, brings in newness to the script". bangalore mirror wrote "not repeating a successful combination is a sin. so harsha and shiva rajkumar come up with vajrakaya after succeeding with bhajarangi. no doubt a large number of fans come with the hangover of bhajarangi. director harsha, however, serves something very different from the previous film. but one thing he manages very well is to send them back satisfied". chitraloka wrote "though there is enough of action and heroism there is a lot more sentiment. particularly the mother-son sentiment that is the trademark of many shivarajkumar films has been given a new dimension by harsha. there are also so many different elements packed into this film that there is plenty for every kind of audience".


== references ==


== external links ==
vajrakaya at imdb