vamshi (kannada: ) is an indian kannada-language action drama film starring puneeth rajkumar and nikitha in the lead roles. it is directed by prakash and produced by smt. parvathamma rajkumar. the film was released on 2 october 2008.


== plot ==
vamshi (puneeth rajkumar) is a trainee in a police academy, who often gets angry in any circumstance. even for minor causes, he gets angry and this makes him land into trouble. once after training, while he is about to be transferred to bangalore for posting, vamshi's anger and past make him lose his interview. his past reveals that he is the son of a rowdy k.r., who was recently murdered by the other group led by jayachandra(another rowdy). his anger, and the link of police and politicians with jayachandra ends vamshi's police interview as a failure.
he gets dejected and being the son of k.r., joins his father's (k.r's) rowdy team as its leader, and is helped by another politician to kill jayachandra and other enemies of k.r. while doing so, he is cast away from his mother (lakshmi) and lover shradha(nikita thukral), which he realizes later their importance, love and affection. finally he changes back to the calm life, whereas his own rowdy team and the politician who helped vamshi in his initial years as a rowdy turn against him, because they want vamshi to be in the rowdy business. a fight ensues between the group and vamshi, who finally emerges as the winner. finally, vamshi takes up job as a teacher, and he, nikita and his mother live happily ever after. 


== cast ==
puneeth rajkumar as vamshi
nikitha as shaaru
lakshmi
sundar raj
komal kumar
ravi kale
rajendra karanth
avinash
hari das. g.
vijay koundinya
arasu maharaj
suresh mangalore
ganesh rao kesarkar
shankar narayan
madhu mandagere
mallesh gowda
tumkur mohan
shankar rao
vidya murthy
b. jayamma
jolly bastin
n. k. vishwanath
ashwath narayan


== music ==
the official soundtrack contains six songs composed by r p patnaik with lyrics penned by v.nagendra prasad, ram narayan. the song 'thayi thayi' was reused from the 1993 kannada film hoovu hannu, which also starred lakshmi.


== reception ==
rediff wrote "vamshi is a different film for director prakash and actor puneet raj kumar. however, despite prakash's emotionally-charged narration the story of this kannada flick lacks credibility".however, the film was declared as a superhit at the box-office .it completed 100 days in more than 12 centers across the state.


== references ==


== external links ==
vamshi at imdb