vanamagan (transl.son of nature) is a 2017 indian tamil-language action adventure film written and directed by a. l. vijay. the film stars jayam ravi and sayyeshaa in the lead roles, with prakash raj, thambi ramaiah, and varun in supporting roles. the music was composed by harris jayaraj. with cinematography by tirru and editing by anthony. the venture began production in september 2016, and the film was released on 23 june 2017.the movie is about a jungle boy who is encountering city life after come out of forest life.


== plot ==
the film starts in the andaman islands. a tribe is being beaten up and taken away by police officers. one tribe member named jara wakes up in a net. a police officer, shanmugam, warns jara that he might be killed and orders him to run away. he gives him some weapons, which he uses to break free.
the film then shifts to the house of kavya. her parents died due to an accident in her childhood. they leave her their industry on her name, kavya industries, which is run by her father's friend rajasekhar (who is very much interested in her wealth). one day at work, rajasekhar asks kavya to sign an asset. he learns that kavya and her friends planned to spend their new year in bora bora, but they were not able to do so because their passports were on hold. rajasekhar suggests that kavya and her friends go to the andaman islands. kavya agrees as long as vicky, her friend and rajasekhar's son, joins her, to which rajasekhar agrees.
while kavya and her friends are in andaman, they behave too notorious. while escaping from the police, they hit a tribal named jara with her car. no hospital in andaman would treat jara, so kavya decides to bring him to chennai. she and her friends go to the airport and dress jara like a normal person. when the ticket seller asks kavya for the flight passengers' names, she tells him the names of her and her friends, but when the seller asks for the sixth passenger's (jara) name, kavya says it is "k. vaasi". when the seller asks for cash, kavya gives him her ring, which is worth 25 lakhs. the friends manage to go to chennai and admit vaasi at a hospital. vicky drops kavya at her house and promises her that he will be back in 10 days. sometime later, kavya arrives at the hospital to find vaasi (in an unconscious state) beating up people. she then goes back home, where she learns from her cook pandian that the hospital sedated vaasi and dropped him at her home. vaasi still continues to act like a wild animal at kavya's house, breaking household objects and gobbling the food in the kitchen. meanwhile, at the hospital in andaman, the police inquires a receptionist about the five people (kavya and her friends) who came. the receptionist says that the hospital tried to admit vaasi into the hospital and that he suggested to take him to either chennai or kolkata. the morning afterwards, kavya and her servants train vaasi to act like a human.
some time later, the film shifts to kavya's house, where her birthday is being celebrated. rajasekhar tells that they are also celebrating a 2,000-crore german project. vicky finds kavya and tells her that he cannot stand vaasi. he later tells her that his father will announce the big news about vicky and kavya's relationship. apparently, vicky told his father about the relationship, and his father invited their family and friends to announce their engagement. kavya then questions vicky and says that she does not love him. both start arguing, and kavya calls for help. at that moment, vaasi barges in and finds vicky forcefully holding kavya's hands. when vicky tries to attack vaasi, the latter throws him out the window and gruesomely attacks him. vaasi later comes to his senses after hearing kavya tell him to stop. however, rajasekhar calls the police, and they encase vaasi in a net and take him away.
at the hospital where vicky gets treated, rajasekhar is told that he has a fractured bone in his neck and will have to wear a cervical collar for life. he is also told that the documents for the german project will need to be signed and dispatched. at the andaman police station, the police say to take vaasi to the forest and finish him off. kavya and pandian arrive at the police station, but one of the officers denies any knowledge of him being brought into the station. however, vaasi soon breaks free and kills the police officers. vaasi, kavya, and pandian flee to the forest as they are being followed by the police. vaasi beats them up and is held at gunpoint by shanmugam. vaasi soon recognizes shanmugam, who is surprised to see that he is alive. kavya asks shanmugam if he knows vaasi, to which he says that his name is actually jara. vaasi then meets up with his people. meanwhile, a young girl sees a rabbit wandering into the forest. she gets worried upon seeing a tiger and worriedly calls out for her father. at that moment, jara saves her, but the tiger suddenly falls as vaasi had cut its body with a knife. vaasi, using some leaves and thorns, manages to stitch the wound and save the tiger. he then takes the girl with him to his tribe. afterwards, vaasi sees trees being destroyed by police and construction, and he and his people shoot arrows at everyone and signal them to leave. meanwhile, the german company asks the andaman police to get the project cleared. despite the efforts from the police and a translator to evacuate the tribe, they refuse to relocate. shanmugam orders the police to shoot the tribe, when he suddenly hears his daughter's voice. his daughter ended up being the person whom vaasi saved from the tiger. at night, vaasi is sleeping and hears people screaming. he goes out to find the shelters being set on fire. a violent battle breaks out between the tribe and the officers, with many people getting killed, including vaasi's father. vaasi is also taken by the police and gets knocked out. 
the film goes back to the beginning with shanmugam warning vaasi about the police. vaasi then runs away from the place, and later, kavya and her friends are partying. they see police officers and think that they are out for them (when they are actually out for vaasi). they ended up hitting vaasi with the car, bringing the scene back to where it was now. shanmugam tells kavya and pandian that he thought the cops had killed vaasi and made everyone think he had run away. when pandian asks where the rest of the tribe is, shanmugam says that they are at elephant hill. he then orders both of them to leave, saying that if vaasi reunites with his tribe, then the entire clan will prosper. pandian tells kavya that they should leave, but kavya suggests that they should help vaasi meet his people. meanwhile, rajasekhar, who has returned from the us, arrives at andaman. kavya tries to get a signal to call him, but to no avail. at the police station, rajasekhar tells that vaasi has kidnapped kavya and orders that kavya be back within 24 hours. meanwhile, vaasi, kavya, and pandian are trying to find where vaasi's people are. vaasi finds an eagle and gets reminded of where they are. pandian suggests that vaasi can handle the rest of the way, but kavya says that they cannot leave him, so she and pandian follow vaasi to his clan.
at the forest office, the police officer introduces suryaprakash, a commando from delhi specialized in forest operations. suryaprakash deduces that there are three ways to enter the forest and says that they have to use full force to cover the three zones. if they do so, the radius of 50 kilometers will gradually reduce to zero. rajasekhar authorizes this plan. meanwhile, as vaasi, kavya, and pandian are walking, pandian sees a bird on a leaf and throws it. the bird turns out to be a spy camera monitored by the commandos. vaasi, kavya, and pandian flee yet again as the commandos are monitoring their movements. as the three of them are running, kavya falls down a ravine and ends up holding onto a branch. vaasi soon manages to save her by swinging from a vine. a bond develops between vaasi and kavya as rajasekhar and the police are out for them. kavya sees smoke and thinks that it is vaasi's tribe, when they are actually commandos, who immediately fire at them. all of a sudden, vaasi is being tied from a tree. suryaprakash warns kavya for her safety and says that he and the officers will shoot him, but kavya says that vaasi is innocent. all of a sudden, everyone hears a tiger growling. the officers and commandos aim their guns at the tiger, but the animal gruesomely kills the officers and commandos. meanwhile, vaasi manages to get himself free.
the next morning, rajasekhar admonishes kavya for eloping with vaasi even though he almost killed vicky. kavya reminds rajasekhar that vaasi and his people are in trouble as a big company is trying to snatch her land. rajasekhar reveals that it is kavya who has done this and shows her the documents that she signed (at the beginning of the film). as rajasekhar escorts kavya in the former's car, they see vaasi and kavya calls out for him. however, rajasekhar hits him with the car. kavya immediately exits and runs to him, only to see him being shot by rajasekhar. the police officers then beat up vaasi badly. after some time, vaasi finally beats up the police officers. afterwards, vaasi beats rajasekhar up but stops after being told to do so by kavya. rajasekhar spares vaasi's life and asks kavya to come with him, only for her to bluntly decline. kavya then says that she does not want any more of her industries and orders rajasekhar to leave, to which he does so without punishing anyone.


== cast ==


== production ==
after the success of madarasapattinam, a. l. vijay planned to cast suriya in the lead role. suriya liked the script, but the role did not materialise due to budget constraints.
later in november 2015, it was reported that a. l. vijay would direct a film starring jayam ravi in the lead role. the actor confirmed that the duo would begin work on the project in the middle of 2016, following the completion of his other films. the film was reported to be about a man who escapes from the lost kingdom of kumari kandam. in may 2016, vijay confirmed that the project would begin later in the year and revealed that the film would be shot extensively in the andaman islands. music composer harris jayaraj and cinematographer tirru were also brought in for the project.the film was subsequently launched in september 2016 with production beginning thereafter in chennai. sayyeshaa was signed on to portray the leading female role in the film, marking her debut in tamil films. sanjay bharathi and varun also signed on to work on the film, with the latter revealing that he would play the heroine's love interest and that jayam ravi would portray a tribal man who finds himself in the city. the film teaser was officially released on 6 february 2017. the background score of the teaser was that of an african tribal music and was well received.


=== release ===
initially, the film had its release date fixed on 19 may 2017. due to the announcement of the film industry strike on 30 may 2017, the producer has postponed the theatrical release to 23 june 2017. the satellite rights of the film were sold to zee tamil. baradwaj rangan of film companion wrote "vanamagan gradually becomes terribly serious, and a comic adventure turns into a tiresomely earnest drama
."


== soundtrack ==
the film's original soundtrack is scored by harris jayaraj, his first collaboration with director a. l. vijay and third film with actor jayam ravi after dhaam dhoom and engeyum kaadhal. this is jayaraj's 50th film as a composer. the complete album was released on 22 april 2017.

all lyrics are written by madhan karky.


== references ==


== external links ==
vanamagan at imdb