varadhanayaka is a 2013 indian kannada-language action film starring sudeep, chiranjeevi sarja, and nikeesha patel in the lead roles. this film marks the kannada debut of sameera reddy, an established bollywood, tollywood and kollywood actress. the film is directed by ayyappa p. sharma. arjun janya is the music director of the film. shankare gowda has produced the venture under shankar productions banner. it is also dubbed in hindi as ek tha nayak. 
the film is a remake of telugu film lakshyam which starred gopichand, jagapathi babu and anushka shetty.


== plot ==
the film starts with a flashback in bangalore. acp varadhanayaka (sudeep) is a sincere police officer happily married and lives with his parents, wife (sameera reddy) and younger brother hari (chiranjeevi sarja). hari is a college student and he falls in love with his classmate sirisha (nikeesha patel). enter section shankar (p. ravi shankar) the villain who is notorious for settlements and land deals. sirisha comes across acp varadhanayaka when she is on a field trip from her college with her friends. she gets friendly with his daughter pinky who tells her that she would get her introduced to her uncle hari and they would make a good pair. it turns out that hari studies in sirishas college and soon after they accidentally even come to know each other and get close.
acp varadhanayaka investigates the case of a dreaded criminal shankar whom no one has been able to touch. he is even involved with a land deal involving crores of money which is completely illegal and others including the d.i.g is involved. when the chairman of the bank who has lent money for the deal demand the money back as the deal hasnt worked, shankar eliminates him. the people who are customers of the bank take to the streets and try to damage the bank. acp varadhanayaka arrives there, arrests the manager and takes him away. somehow shankar comes to know where the manager has been taken. he arrives there with his men and the d.i.g nearly kill acp varadhanayaka. shankar asks his men to dump the body. on the way, somehow hari gets involved and ultimately rescues his brother from a burning bus and the elder brother dies in the younger brothers arms. the entire media and the people think that acp varadhanayaka has swindled off all the money as they have been made to believe that by the d.i.g. hari decides to take revenge on the people who killed his brother. firstly he kills siddharth(j.karthik) (his friend and shankars henchman). then he kills the d.i.g (he had been taken to jail and he had escaped). shankar also kidnaps the entire family of hari. hari goes to an old temple where he kills shankar, he spills the beans that varadhanayaka is dead and rescues his family under the supervision of the new d.i.g who supports him wholeheartedly.


== cast ==
sudeep as varadhanayaka
chiranjeevi sarja as hari
sameera reddy as lakshmi, varadhanayaka's wife
nikeesha patel as sirisha
p. ravi shankar as section shankar
dr ambareesh ... (guest appearance)
sumalatha ambareesh ... (guest appearance)
rockline venkatesh ... (guest appearance)
mukhyamantri chandru as news reporter
jai jagadish
shobaraj as section shankar's pa
sharath lohitashwa as director of inspector general
j. karthik as section shankar's brother
sharan as hari's friend
chitra shenoy
padmaja rao
bullet prakash
dharma
satyajit
rajiv and others


== production ==


=== casting ===
shankare gowda, the producer had initially cast chiranjeevi sarja to play the main protagonist played by gopichand in the telugu version. later, to reprise the cop role played by jagapathi babu in the original version, gowda approached sudeep, his main star in the previous venture kempegowda. owing to the success of their previous venture, gowda decided to give extra screen time for sudeep in the new film. gowda was in search of two leading female stars from the kannada industry. however, due to date issues, none could be roped in. actress priyamani was approached to play the lead but she refused the offer. finally in july 2011, nikesha patel who had just begun her career in telugu films was cast opposite sarja in the lead role. later kamalinee mukherjee was approached to play the role opposite sudeep. however, she was dropped and later bollywood actress sameera reddy was finally roped in for the role. director ayyappa sharma's brothers sai kumar and p. ravi shankar were also roped in to play the supporting characters. it was also announced that arjun sarja would be doing a cameo appearance in the film.


=== filming ===
as per the initial plans, the film was supposed to go on sets from february 2011. however several delays caused the shooting to regularly commence from june 2011. the filming began without even casting the leading ladies for the film.


== release ==
initially, the film was plan to release on 23, november 2012. the film released in india on 25 january 2013 to mixed reviews. and also kannada sangha in canada released this film in canada on 28 april 2013


=== box-office ===
varadhanayaka box office collection is grossed more than 130 million (us$1.8 million). the satellite rights of the film was sold to suvarna channel for 22.5 million (us$320,000).


== soundtrack ==
arjun janya has composed 5 songs to the lyrics of kaviraj and a. p. arjun.


== awards and nominations ==
3rd south indian international movie awards :-

best actor in a negative role - nominated - p. ravi shankar
best music director - nominated - arjun janya
best playback singer (male) - won - arjun janya for the song "baite baite"


== references ==


== external links ==
varadhanayaka at imdb
varadhanayaka at allmovie