varnyathil aashanka (confusion in description) is a 2017 indian malayalam-language comedy film directed by sidharth bharathan, written by thrissur gopalji and produced by ashiq usman. it stars kunchacko boban, suraj venjaramoodu, chemban vinod jose, manikandan r. achari, shine tom chacko and rachana narayanankutty. the film was released on 4 august 2017 across kerala and the film received positive reviews from audience.


== plot ==
the film tells the story of four thieves: kautta shivan (kunchako boban), wilson (chemban vinod jose), pratheesh (shine tom chacko), gilbert (manikandan r achari) and a common man dayanandan (suraj venjaramoodu). they are settled and work in thrissur. the four thieves plans a robbery attempt at a jewellery on a local strike day. dayanandan gets into the team unexpectedly. what happens next forms the crux of the story.


== cast ==


== production ==
initially it was reported that asif ali was in the cast in lead role. later, he was replaced by kunchacko boban.


== reception ==
sify rated 3 out of 5 stars and praised kunchacko boban and suraj venjarammoodu's performances and stated "varnyathil aashanka may be far from perfect, but its a genuine effort for sure". indiaglitz rated 3 out of 5 stars and said "varnyathil aashanka is a well crafted and entertaining watch". manorama online rated 3 out of 5 stars and stated "varnyathil aashanka isn't a boisterous comedy that provides you a thorough laughter riot, but it lends you some occasions to cheer silently and heartily". lensmen reviews rated 3.5 out of 5 stars and said " varnyathil aashanka is one movie you should definitely try. it may not be an out of the box theme or exceptional execution, but the 136 minutes of this movie is never boring and the screenplay completely invests in focusing on its final target".the times of india rated 3 out of 5 stars and said "varnyathilaashanka is worth your time for suraj's performance, a handful of situational comedies and the smart 'utpreksha' delightfully weaved into it". filmibeat rated 3 out of 5 stars and stated "varnyathil aashanka is yet another film in the league of good entertainers, without any unwanted gimmicks. as mentioned above, the film has a humorous tone throughout and undoubtedly, is one of the decent satires of recent times".
baradwaj rangan of film companion south wrote "varnayathil ashanka, then, is less about plot than about these characters, and events that are equally interconnected...this message is slyly delivered on a stage, and its the latest instance in malayalam cinema of a scene you dont see coming, and yet feels totally right. even the films looseness, by the end, feels right, for this is really a shaggy-dog story. the pointlessness is the point."


== references ==


== external links ==
varnyathil aashanka on facebook
varnyathil aashanka at imdb