varudu (transl.bridegroom) is a 2010 indian telugu-language romantic action film directed by gunasekhar in his tenth directorial film. this film stars allu arjun, tamil actor arya, and bhanu sri mehra in the lead roles, while suhasini mani ratnam, ashish vidyarthi, and brahmanandam, among others, play supporting roles. d.v.v. danayya is the producer of the film. the music was composed by mani sharma, and the film released on 31 march 2010.


== plot ==
sandeep 'sandy' (allu arjun) is a next-gen youngster who parties hard and has a modern outlook, but his ideas towards marriage are traditional. as he gets a job in the usa, his parents vasundhara (suhasini) and raj gopal (ashish vidyarthi), who got married against their respective parents' wishes, ask him to get married. he accepts and tells them that he will marry a girl of their choice in a ceremony that lasts five days. he also refuses to see his bride until the marriage. everything is arranged according to his wishes, and his marriage is fixed with deepthi (bhanu sri mehra). at the ceremony, when sandy and deepthi see each other, they fall in love at first sight. deepthi gets kidnapped by a local goon named diwakar (arya). sandy's family tries to convince him for another marriage, but he refuses and tries finding his bride. he gets to know deepthi's whereabouts. diwakar kidnapped deepthi to take revenge from her as she slapped him for misbehaving with her in public. the police gets killed by diwakar and his men. sandy takes law into his hands and kidnaps diwakar's brother and gets his bride. in a scuffle, he challenges diwakar for a fight on his marriage day, to which he agrees. sandy and deepthi get married successfully, this time with all the rituals. when they step out of the mandap, diwakar attacks sandy. a fight happens in which sandy overcomes diwakar and kills him. sandy and deepthi then live happily ever after.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
though singer malavika sang the song relare relare , geetha madhuri who lent vocals for only very few lines was credited as the singer.the audio rendered by mani sharma was launched on 7 march 2010 at ramanaidu studios in hyderabad. the audio was released in the market by aditya music. the event was held in a wedding atmosphere with the cast and crew dressed in traditional attire. film personalities like allu arjun, allu aravind, gunasekhar, veturi sundararama murthy, mani sharma, sirish, d. v. v. danayya, dil raju, thota prasad, s. s. rajamouli, daggubati suresh babu, shyam prasad reddy, kondavalasa lakshmana rao, k. s. rama rao, b. gopal, m. l. kumar chowdary, b. v. s. n. prasad, k. l. narayana, etc., were present. the audio cds were released by s. s. rajamouli and the first copy was received by allu aravind. the audio cassettes were released by shyam prasad reddy and he presented the first copy to daggubati suresh babu. the function began with the dance performances for allu arjun's earlier film songs. veturi was felicitated at the audio release function and it turned out to be his penultimate movie  before his death on 22 may 2010.

all tracks are written by veturi sundararama murthy.


== awards ==
2010  nandi award for best special effects  sri alagar swamy.


== reception ==
	
varudu had poor reviews 


== references ==


== external links ==
varudu at imdb