vasu is a 2002 indian telugu-language musical romantic comedy film written and directed by a. karunakaran, and produced by k. s. rama rao under the creative commercials banner. it stars venkatesh and bhumika chawla with music composed by harris jayaraj.vasu marked venkatesh's 50th film as an actor. the film has garnered the state nandi award for akkineni award for best home-viewing feature film. later, the film was dubbed into tamil as vetri and hindi as cheetah the leopard.


== plot ==
after graduation, vasu (venkatesh) runs a college canteen, music school and teaches music for seven years to make his living. his father (vijay kumar) is an ips officer and he wants vasu to appear for civil services examinations to take up ips career. but vasu has different plans for his future. he dreams of becoming a musician and a singer.
one fine day a young ips officer comes to vasu's places to seek the blessings of vasu's father. he admits that vasu's father is the source of inspiration for him to become an ips officer. vasu's father dejected that his son does not heed his advice of giving civils exams, feels bad about his son. meanwhile, vasu spots a beautiful girl divya (bhumika chawla) on the street. he plays every possible trick to woo her. but all his plans backfire on him and make himself a fool in the eyes of divya.
vasu father spots vasu bashing the guys up in the streets and asks him to leave the house and stay outside. vasu leaves the house. divya comes down to vasu's place along with her luggage when vasu was about to leave the house. later on, vasu comes to know that divya is the daughter of vasu's father's childhood friend. vasu sees this as an opportunity to get close to divya. he returns to his home and promises that he won't touch music again and concentrates only on his studies. but vasu secretly pursues his music ambitions.
vasu passes the preliminary auditions of music talent search conducted by sony music company. when vasu's father spots the letter from sony, he argues with his son and asks him to either be there in house and study for ips or leave home to pursue his dream of becoming a musician. divya falls in love with vasu and vice versa. but they never express their feelings towards each other. vasu's sister loves the brother of divya and it's okayed by the parents of both parties. it is also revealed that divya already okayed a guy called manohar by looking at his photograph (this is much before she met vasu).
now it's time for the real test. it's d-day. vasu is on the stage to prove himself as a singer and musician in the final auditions of sony talent search. divya and manohar are to marry on the same day. and vasu's sister is to marry divya's brother. vasu wins the prize at the audition and sits in a park mourning his heartbreak. then his father and sister arrive and his father apologizes about his thinking about vasu's career. it is revealed then that divya did not marry that day along with vasu's sister as she loved vasu. in the end, the lovers unite and the two couples' marriages are rescheduled.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
music composed by harris jayaraj. the music was released on aditya music company. (the audio got unanimous hit talk all over airplay and within 4 days of its release it had sold over 2 lakhs. the peppy number "sportive boys" topped the charts for many weeks.)

all tracks are written by thamarai.


== references ==


== external links ==
vasu at imdb