vasuvum saravananum onna padichavanga (transl.vasu and saravanan studied together) also known by the initialism vsop, is a 2015 indian tamil-language romantic comedy film written and directed by m. rajesh. it features arya and santhanam in lead roles while tamannaah and bhanu play female lead roles. arya produced the film through his studio the show people, associating with prasad v potluri's pvp cinema. the film was dubbed into telugu as aishwaryabhimasthu and into hindi as lafange deewane.
the soundtrack was composed by d. imman. nirav shah and vivek harshan handled cinematography and editing, respectively. the film began production in november 2014 and was released on 14 august 2015.


== plot ==
vaasu and saravanan are best friends. when vaasu's marriage was going to be fixed with seema, saravanan wants to first interview seema to see if she is a suitable bride for vaasu. a series of comedic incidents happens during the interview and during the marriage of vasu and seema, which angers and embarrasses seema. to make matters worse, saravanan plays a prank during vaasu's marriage night, which makes vaasu end up in hospital with a broken disc.
an angry seema wants vaasu to break his friendship with saravanan and declares that nothing between them until then. vaasu does not want to break his friendship with saravanan directly as to not hurt saravanan's feelings. he gets the help of his friend gautham, who tells him to get saravanan married. vaasu helps saravanan get a girlfriend in the hopes that the girlfriend will be a reason to end the friendship. saravanan and vaasu go to happymarriage.com, where saravanan falls for aishwarya balakrishnan, who works there.
aishwarya, who initially dislikes saravanan, eventually agrees to his love. as saravanan had interviewed seema before she married vaasu, vaasu interviews aishwarya at a caf. a fight breaks out between aishwarya and vaasu, forcing saravanan to choose between the two. saravanan chooses aishwarya and breaks his friendship with vaasu. vaasu later exits the caf dramatically but secretly enjoys outside by dancing.
vaasu reunites with seema, but minutes later, saravanan appears, revealing that he was only lying in front of aishwarya that he had broken their friendship. seema feels cheated as vaasu had promised seema upon their future child that their friendship was cut. seema is furious and leaves to her mother's place. vaasu gets irritated and tells saravanan to leave and never show his face again.
that night, gautham tells vaasu that saravanan had broken up with aishwarya for him. vaasu immediately rushes to see him, and they reunite. they decide to start a club of men who have been cheated by their wives or girlfriends. this turns out to be successful. they are also supported by akila chechi, the leader of akila indian men security club. then, assistant commissioner vetrivel arrives and tells the trio to join up with their wives by lying that they have their friendship cut.


== cast ==


== production ==
in november 2013, arya agreed to finance and star in the lead role of director m. rajesh's next venture, with santhanam also brought in to the project to play a supporting role. nayantara was also reported to be a part of the film and an official press statement was released during the same month, stating that filming would begin in late 2014 after arya had finished his ongoing commitments. in march 2014, rajesh revealed that it would be a sequel to their successful comedy film boss engira bhaskaran (2010) and that tamannaah would also play a new character in the franchise. nayantara later opted out of the film, and rajesh began re-working the script. in october 2014, rajesh then announced that the film would not be a sequel to his previous film and that it would be a new script.a launch event was held on 21 november 2014 and the team began production on the same day, with scenes involving arya and tamannaah shot. the cast and crew list was also revealed with bhanu, karunakaran and vidyullekha raman also included in the film. the movie title has been revealed as vaasuvum saravananum onna padichavanga on 24 november. the logo took on the theme of alcoholic beverages, as the logo was an image of a beer bottle cap and the title itself was a play on its contraction "vsop", which normally abbreviated to its description of certain types of brandy, "very superior old pale". it was known that prasad v potluri is also producing the film under his banner pvp cinema along with arya's 'the show people'.


== soundtrack ==
d. imman composed the musical score and soundtrack of this movie. this is his 75th film as music composer. behindwoods rated 2.5 out of 5 and stated "vsop is sorta catchy but lacks the fizz".


== release ==
promoted as arya's 25th film, the satellite telecast rights were sold to star vijay. the official teaser released on 22 july 2015.


=== reception ===
rediff gave the film 2 stars out of 5 and wrote that "the offending script make rajesh's vaasuvum saravananum onna padichavanga a silly and tasteless film that does not deserve your time." indiaglitz gave the film 2.5 stars out of 5 and wrote, "this film has many rib tickling, entertaining and engaging moments. but when can we expect an entertainer from kollywood that does not pass demeaning judgments on women and tease someone for their looks to make others laugh?." the times of india gave the film 2.5 stars out of 5 and wrote, "what rajesh has done is [..] taking bits and pieces from his previous successful films and giving us a new film that feels familiar. the only difference is that he manages to succeed... to an extent". india today rated 1 star and criticised that "rajesh's two-and-half-hour script has nothing, but female bashing, making fun of plus-sized women, double-meaning-ed, innuendo-ed dialogues and absurd one-liners, which are sweet-coated as humour". baradwaj rangan of the hindu wrote "with such a premise, and with these overgrown adolescents in every frame, why isn't the film a series of dumb and dumber-style physical-comedy sketches? why the flabby romantic passages, with mood-killing songs during which everyone in the theatre returns to whatever game they were playing on their phones?"


== references ==


== external links ==
vasuvum saravananum onna padichavanga at imdbuu