veede (english: him) is a 2003 indian telugu-language action film directed by ravi raja pinisetty. this film stars ravi teja, arti agarwal, reema sen, and sayaji shinde. the film is a remake of tamil movie dhool (2003), which was also remade in sinhala as ranja, in punjabi as the lion of punjab, and bengali as ghatak. sayaji shinde, telangana shakuntala, and pasupathy reprise their roles from the original. the film was also later dubbed in hindi as ek aur zaalim in 2009.


== plot ==
yedukondalu (ravi teja) is an uneducated, head strong youth in bobbarlanka village. he and his village heads decide to close down the nearby factory by appealing to politicians as its letting out a lot of pollutants into the river which is the main source of food, water and livelihood for them. he and another girl mangatayaru (aarti agarwal) are sent to hyderabad to appeal to mla of their constituency - byragi naidu (sayaji shinde). they stay at a friend's place, (ali's house) and try to get their work done by the minister. in the process many hurdles come across them. yedukondalu roughs up a few of the mla's goons and is always at loggerheads with his henchmen. after all this, byragi naidu begins to show his true colors and plans to butcher edu kondalu as he is forming as an obstruction to his underground activities, unknowingly. then, the protagonist of the story decides to teach the mla a lesson, get his job done of closing down the factory. swapna (reema sen) is a journalist who stays in yedukondalu's locality and has a heavy crush on him. she also helps him in pinning down the minister. the remaining plot is how intelligently yedukondalu outclasses the minister and earns good name. also in the plot, the hero makes use of shakeela's films to defame the minister and she herself makes an appearance in the film.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the music is composed by chakri and released by supreme. the song "ammadi yamma yammare" was borrowed from the tamil original.


== external links ==
veede at imdb