veergati (martyrdom) is a 1995 indian hindi-language action film written, produced and directed by k.k singh, starring salman khan, atul agnihotri, divya dutta and akhilendra mishra. this film is only film of pooja dadwal.  upon release the film received positive reviews mostly for its action, and did average business at the box office, but had a successful dvd release.


== plot ==
hawaldar finds an abandoned newborn baby boy in the gutter of kamathipura, a red light area of mumbai. a prostitute, meanwhile gave birth to another baby boy. she decides to educate him and requests hawaldar to give him a father's name. hawaldar's wife does not accept the child and leaves for her parents home. hawaldar adopts the child and names him ajay while the prostitute's son is named shlok. both are admitted to school and become friends. shlok does well in studies whereas ajay takes up gambling. shlok falls in love with pooja, daughter of j.k - a millionaire. ajay does not believe in love and is a cynic. havaldar tries his best to get ajay a job, but ajay finds it difficult to work in a corrupt society. ekka seth is a terror in the prostitutes' basti, he exploits the innocent girls and forces them into prostitution. shlok graduates and completes his m.b.a. ajay wins a crore rupees in gambling and encourages shlok to pursue his project.  ekka and his men abduct and kill hawaldar's daughter, sandhya. ajay decides to avenge this and proceeds to kill ekka's men and frees the sex workers from his clutches. he then takes on ekka and manages to kill him, but is grievously wounded in the fight. the final scene shows ajay dying in the process of burning ekka alive and attaining martyrdom.


== cast ==
salman khan... ajay
divya dutta... sandhya
atul agnihotri...  shlok
pooja dadwal...  pooja
akhilendra mishra... ikka seth
himani shivpuri... shlok's mom and ajay's adopted mom
farida jalal... parvati
rohini hattangadi...  shanta
saeed jaffrey...  pooja's dad
kulbhushan kharbanda... havaldar
sudesh berry... police inspector neelkanth singh


== soundtrack ==
the music was composed by aadesh shrivastava and released by trimurti sound. all lyrics were penned by indeevar, dev kohli, shyam raj and madan pal.


== references ==


== external links ==
veergati at imdb