vellimoonga (english: barn owl) is a 2014 indian malayalam political satire film directed by jibu jacob and written by joji thomas. it stars biju menon in the lead role with aju varghese, nikki galrani, tini tom, k. p. a. c. lalitha, sasi kalinga, saju navodaya, kalabhavan shajon, veena nair, and siddique in supporting roles. asif ali appears in a cameo role. the music was composed by bijibal.
the film was released on 25 september 2014 in 60 centres across kerala. the film became one of the highest-grossing malayalam films of 2014, with ticket sales estimated at 60 crore (us$8.4 million). the movie was remade in tamil in 2016 as muthina kathirika.


== summary ==
mamachan (biju menon) is an unmarried male who is in his 40s. mamachan who always wanted to become a politician joins a relative unknown party based in north india that barely has any presence in kerala.he is subject to taunts and retorts due to this though he is the national leader of the party he belongs to. 
well known for his cunning and slimy tactics mamachan has his share of haters in the village.mamachan eventually decides to get married and visits a prospective bride , only to be chased away by the brides father (siddique) as mamachan and the brides mother were classmates and friends while in their teens. 
mamachan in an attempt to get serious in life decides to progress in his political career after he is taunted for being a good-for-nothing lazing around in a party without any scope or future.mamachan visits delhi and is given instructions to stand in elections with the understanding that if he loses his election deposit in kerala he will be elevated to a role in centre which is viewed with jealousy by his colleague gopi(kalabhavan shajon).
gopi decides its better to let mamachan wins in kerala and stays as an mla rather than losing and moving to delhi for a better role . gopi subsequently rallies all of mamachans rivals together to work for mamachans victory so that they can prevent him from going to delhi resulting in mamachans victory in polls. only after elections its revealed everything was mamachans plans to win elections as an mla making others to work for his victory and there was nothing in delhi.
mamachans prospective brides alliance is fixed with a guy from mumbai named charlie.(asif ali) who disappears on the day of the wedding. to save the brides and her familys honour mamachan is requested by the village elders and priest to marry her. after the marriage charlie appears and reveals he was mamachans friend and his disappearance was a part of a plan by mamachan to marry her. 
both are shown to be happily married and moving on after that


== cast ==


== reception ==
vellimoonga received positive reviews upon release. nowrunning.com gave 4.5/5 and called it a  "surprise winner".sify reported that vellimoonga had a good opening and called the film an "instant hit". the film became one of the highest grossing malayalam film of the year, with a box office collection estimated at 20 crore (us$2.8 million). it also earned 4.5 crore (us$630,000) from satellite rights.the film was remade in tamil as muthina kathirika by sundar c.. tini tom won the asianet film award for best supporting actor - male for this film in 2014.


== soundtrack ==


== references ==