veruthe oru bharya (english: a wife for nothing) is a 2008 indian malayalam-language drama film written by k. gireesh kumar and directed by akku akbar. the film stars jayaram, gopika and nivetha thomas in the lead roles. the film was a commercial success at the box office. for her role, nivetha thomas received kerala state film award for best child artist that year. gopika also received the asianet film award for best female actor.


== plot ==
sugunan (jayaram) is a husband who habitually underestimates his wife bindu (gopika) in managing a family. sugunan wants his wife only to keep house - cook food for him, iron his clothes and clean the house. even after a long tiring day for bindu, who does all these and more, but, there's never a word of appreciation or a compliment from her husband. he doesn't even acknowledge the work that she is doing without any rest in her life. this often results in quarrels between them, but like any docile indian wife, bindu tolerates it for some time.
sugunan is also indifferent (and possibly hostile) to bindu's family - even though her father makes many attempts to get close to him. bindu is upset at his behaviour. when he has the electricity supply to her father's house shut down since they were drawing power from the electrical grid, during her brothers wedding,bindu misunderstands.
later, during a trip to kodaikanal, sugunan doesn't "allow" bindu to indulge in normal tourist activities like train rides etc. sugunan's indifference when bindu's mother dies drives her the point that she is just a non-entity in her husband's life. once sugunan slaps her in a fit of rage and she decides enough is enough and goes back to her house.
a boy persuades sugunan's teenage daughter anjana (nivetha thomas) to go for a drive with him, and the jeep breaks down. some thugs chance upon the hapless girl and try to molest her. the police arrive and rescue the two youngsters. alarmed by the situation, sugunan and bindu are reunited and live happily ever after.


== cast ==
jayaram as sugunan raman
gopika as bindu kalyani
nivetha thomas as anjana sugunan, the 14-year-old daughter of sugunan
innocent as bindu's father
suraj venjaramoodu as ali
madhu warrier as rameshan, bindu's brother
jaffar idukki as kuttan
sivaji guruvayoor as chackochan
kalabhavan prajod as sunny
ganesh kumar as dr cherian paul
sona nair
mini arun
sarayu mohan as betty
mahima
unknown as sandeep, anjana's friend
ambika mohan as headmistress
rahman in (cameo appearance)


== production ==
the film was mainly shot at various locations in thodupuzha.


== box office ==
the film was a commercial success at the box office. it completed 100 days run in theatres. made on a budget of 1.45 crore, it grossed a distributor's share of 6 crore.


== references ==


== external links ==
veruthe oru bharya at imdb