waah! tera kya kehna (english: wow! you're amazing) is a 2002 bollywood comedy film directed by manoj agrawal starring govinda and raveena tandon. the film was failure in the box office.


== plot ==
kishan oberoi, a renowned businessman has two sons dilip oberoi and ashish oberoi. he don't trust his sons as they are after his property. raj, kishan's grandson, loves his grandfather more than anyone in his family and also kishan is only devotee to raj. kishan wants raj to take care of all his property after his death. raj gets attracted to meena. after some incidents, they get engaged. after engagement raj meets with an accident where he gets brain damaged, resulting in showing his childish behaviour. this results in the cancellation of the wedding with meena. due to conspiracy caused by vicky, raj has to part way from his grandfather along with murari. when raj comes to know that meena won't come to meet raj, raj flees from murari's house, disappearing mysteriously in the sandstorm. 
at the same time, dilip, ashish and dilip's son vicky along with charles kills kishan by mixing drug in the tea and later throwing him from top of the building.
at the same time, murari meets raj's lookalike banne khan and his wife, salma khan and their assistant. he wants banne khan to act as raj and get raj's property back and teach them a lesson. after some settlements, banne khan agrees with salma khan to act as raj's nurse. in the meantime, original raj returns and both he and banne khan reunite to eliminate his uncles and charles, in which they succeed.


== cast ==
govinda as raj oberoi / banne khan
raveena tandon as inspector salma khan
preeti jhangiani as meena
shakti kapoor as dilip oberoi
shammi kapoor as kishan oberoi
kader khan as murari
ashish vidyarthi as charles
mohnish bahl as vikram oberoi (vicky)
rajat bedi as meena's brother
rana jung bahadur as ashish oberoi
navneet nishan as anju oberoi (dilip's wife)
supriya karnik as madhu oberoi (ashish's wife)
rakesh bedi as murari's opponent
anil dhawan as meena's dad
anju mahendru as meena's mom
raju srivastava as banne khan's assistant


== soundtrack ==


== references ==


== external links ==
waah..! tera kya kehna at imdb