waisa bhi hota hai part ii (transl.it happens that way too, part ii) is a 2003 indian hindi-language film starring arshad warsi. shashanka ghosh, the creative driver behind the launch of mtv and channel v in india, marks his debut as a director with this film. running in many parallel threads, it is in equal parts a comedy, satire, crime, and a hindi masala film. the film is popular for its songs "allah ke bande" performed by kailash kher and "sajna aa bhi jaa" performed by shibani kashyap.


== plot ==
puneet sayal (arshad warsi) is a copywriter with a dream: to earn enough cash to dump his job and live peacefully in nainital. till the said dream materialises however, he's living in bombay with his girlfriend agni (sandhya mridul).
things go asunder one day when he finds out his brother's been shot dead  a brother he's hardly acknowledged in the past. agni finds out and, following an argument, throws him out of the house. puneet goes on a drinking spree that leads him to a park bench where he witnesses someone being shot. he doesn't know it yet, but this is the end of his life as he knows it.
he saves the injured man  a gangster called vishnu (prashant narayanan)  and the act lands him squarely in the middle of bombay's famed gang wars.
the war between ganglords ganpat (anant jog) and gangu (pratima kazmi) is a second thread in the film. ganpat is the dominant kingpin, and gangu is the perpetual second-in-place who's never given up her dreams of displacing ganpat as top don.


== cast ==
arshad warsi as puneet sayal
prashant narayanan as vishnu
sandhya mridul as inspector agni sinha
anant jog as ganpat
pratima kazmi as gangu tai
suchitra pillai as shalu
manini de as sumi
skand mishra as chandu
kurush deboo as cyrus


== trivia ==
waisa bhi hota hai part ii is not a sequel to any other film. part i and part iii are in the same movie. part i runs for about 9 minutes before part ii starts, while part iii runs for less than a minute before the end credits roll.
in the credits, the filmmakers acknowledges the coen brothers, quentin tarantino, ram gopal varma, takeshi kitano, mahesh manjrekar and ramesh sippy as inspiration.
singers kailash kher, shibani kashyap and rabbi shergill make a cameo in the film and sing their songs on-screen.
actress mahima chaudhry and ex-mtv vj maria goretti make special appearances.
the barista trio in the film comprises channel v vjs ranvir shorey and shruti seth, and john owen.


== reception ==
the film received rave reviews from critics, but failed commercially.


== awards ==
kailash kher won the best male playback singer award at the 2004 star screen awards. the film was nominated for best performance in a negative role (pratima kazmi), best dialogues, best editing, best lyrics and best screenplay at the star screen awards but failed to win any.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack features seven songs by composers including vishal-shekhar, shibani kashyap, saibal basu and abhinav dhar and written by sadaquat hussain, vishal dadlani, abhinav dhar and virag. the soundtrack listing is given below.
"aao aa jao aa bhi jao" (sunidhi chauhan) (music: vishal-shekhar)  4:48
"allah ke bande" (kailash kher) (music: vishal-shekhar)  4:06
"laundiya ke pallu mein" (rabbi shergill)  4:51
"my name is gurdeep" (bali brahmbhatt)  3:53
"saajna aa bhi ja" (shibani kashyap)  4:26
"tum bas tum" (shibani kashyap)  3:57
"prem dunk" (shibani kashyap)  3:40


== notes ==


== external links ==
official site
waisa bhi hota hai part ii at imdb
waisa bhi hota hai part ii at allmovie