walking the edge is a 1985 crime film and action film directed by norbert meisel, written by curt allen, and starring robert forster, nancy kwan, joe spinell, a martinez, james mcintire, wayne woodson, luis contreras.


== plot ==
a criminal gang led by brusstar (joe spinell) enters a home with the intention of killing a man. a housewife, christine (nancy kwan), survives the hit that kills her husband and young son. shocked, she discovers that her upstanding citizen of a husband (phil h. fravel) was a drug dealer. she decides to take revenge on the criminal gang that has murdered her husband and son.
a down on his luck l.a. taxi driver and numbers runner, jason walk (robert forster) unwittingly becomes involved and helps her in her quest to survive and take revenge on the people who murdered her family.


== cast ==
robert forster as jason walk
nancy kwan as  christine holloway
joe spinell as  brusstar
a martinez as  tony
james mcintire as  jimmy
wayne woodson as  mckee
doug toby as  danny holloway
phil h. fravel as  jerry holloway
luis contreras as  jesus
terrence beasor as  gambler bob
bernard erhard as  fat man
jim fitzpatrick as  fat man's bodyguard (as james fitzpatrick)
ivy bethune as  mrs. johnson
jacqueline giroux as  linda (as jackie giroux)
aarika wells as  julia
howard honig as  ron
frankie hill as  delia
russ courtney as  leon
jerry jones as gabby
leonard d'john as  mickey
peter pan as chinese herbalist
jamie v. arias as  tango man
rosa m. torres as  tango woman
stan kamber as  punk rock bartender
falling idols as punk band


== home media ==
the film was released on videocassette in 1985 by vestron video. afterwards, anchor bay released the film onto dvd in 2000. the dvd contained a commentary by director norbert meisel and stars nancy kwan and robert forster. fun city editions will release the film on blu-ray in 2021 with a new 4k restoration from the original 35mm camera negative.


== references ==


== external links ==
walking the edge at imdb
walking the edge at rotten tomatoes
walking the edge at allmovie