waqt hamara hai (transl.time is ours) is a  1993 indian romantic action comedy film. it was directed by bharat rangachary and produced by sajid nadiadwala. the stars were akshay kumar and sunil shetty, paired together for the first time.


== plot ==
vikas sabkuchwala (akshay kumar) is a student who repeatedly fails in his exams, much to the dismay of his father dinanath sabkuchwala (played by anupam kher). dinanath is a miser. vikas is in love with his colleague, ayesha (ayesha jhulka). dinanath's accountant's nephew sunil chowdhary (suniel shetty) comes to mumbai from haryana for higher education. sunil has been expelled from most of the colleges in haryana due to his aggressive and violent nature. in mumbai, his uncle gets him admitted into the same college as vikas through dinanath's recommendation. on the first day of his college term, his uncle dresses him up to make him look like a nerd so that he doesn't get into more fights. on his way to college, sunil meets mamta (mamta kulkarni) and helps her change her car's tyre by lifting up the car. mamta is amazed by his strength and simplicity. in the college, vikas tries to rag sunil and in the canteen sunil has a chat with mamta, after which sunil falls in love with mamta. vikas and sunil have a gruesome fight one day but they become friends eventually when sunil saves vikas as he is about to fall from a building. meanwhile, a group of terrorists led by colonel chikara (rami reddy) are chased by the police and unwillingly leave a bag containing "crypton", a nuclear missile product, in vikas's car and flee. they eventually return to retrieve crypton. unable to find it, they kidnap vikas and ayesha and demand that sunil deliver the product. sunil finds crypton and he leaves along with mamta to deliver it. what happens later is what forms the crux of the story.
vikas and sunil escape from chikara leaving ayesha and mamata to do some of chikaras work.
after this they come back and kill quiet a few of chikaras men and free ayesha and mamata.
they successfully save netaji from dying and they foil colonel chikara's plans. in the end, chikara dies and everybody is safe.


== cast ==
suniel shetty as sunil chaudhry
akshay kumar as vikas sabkuchwala
ayesha jhulka as ayesha
mamta kulkarni as mamta
rami reddy as col. chikara
aruna irani as shanti sabkuchwala
anupam kher as dinanath sabkuchwala
arun bakshi as munim od dinanath and uncle of suniel chaudhry
tiku talsania as tejas raj vidrohi
viju khote as inspector surajmukhi
sudhir dalvi as netaji ramgopal verma
gavin packard as sambo
mahesh anand as major assistant to col. chikara
parvindra as superstar
ragesh asthana college friend of vikas
guddi maruti college friend of ayesha
divya bharti as herself: a tribute in the beginning of the movie (in loving memory of my beloved wife from the movie producer sajid nadiawala)


== soundtrack ==
the music of the film was composed nadeem-shravan and the lyrics were penned by sameer. the soundtrack was released in 1993 on audio cassette and audio cd in tips music and also released in serengetic sirrico madein u.k. under licensed from tips music which consists of 7 songs. the full album is recorded by kumar sanu, udit narayan, vinod rathod, alka yagnik, asha bhosle, kavita krishnamurthy, mohammed aziz, sudesh bhonsle, mitalee choudhary and anupam kher.


== reception ==
the film was the first release of producer sajid nadiadwala after the death of his first wife, divya bharti. therefore, it is dedicated to her memory. the film managed to do average business at the box-office.


== references ==


== external links ==
waqt hamara hai at imdb