washington merry-go-round is a 1932 american pre-code film directed by james cruze and starring lee tracy, constance cummings, walter connolly, and alan dinehart. it was produced by walter wanger.


== plot ==
button gwinnett brown (lee tracy) is a new congressman in the u.s. house of representatives. he refuses bribes, vowing to rid washington of corruption; but crosses swords with powerful senator edward norton (alan dinehart), who wants to enlist brown to help prohibition bootleggers. norton also happens to be chasing elder senator wylie's (walter connolly) granddaughter alice (constance cummings), who brown has also fallen for. in order to silence the idealistic newcomer, politicians stage a phony re-count and brown loses his government seat. however, with the help of senator wylie and alice, brown manages to win back his place and clean up the halls of justice.


== cast ==
lee tracy as button gwinnett brown
constance cummings as alice wylie
walter connolly as senator wylie
alan dinehart as edward t. norton
arthur vintonas as beef brannigan
arthur hoyt as willis
berton churchill as speaker of the house
frank sheridan as john kelleher
clay clement as conti
clarence muse as clarence
wallis clark as carl tilden (uncredited)
larry steers as guard (uncredited)


== critical reception ==
the new york times wrote, ""washington merry-go-round" is a sturdy piece of work with melodramatic interludes. at times it is somewhat reckless in its dealings, but, allowing for its explosive utterances and its eagerness to win popular favor as an entertainment, it arouses a certain amount of interest. there are excellent performances by the cast, headed by the vehement lee tracy, and mr. cruze's direction is for the most part genuinely able"; while more recently allmovie called it "a ridiculously contrived political tale that even in its time must have been viewed as overly simplistic"; whereas leonard maltin wrote that the film "remains surprisingly relevant today, with engaging performances and strong feel for the political arena, but peters out after great first half."


== references ==


== external links ==
washington merry-go-round at imdb
washington merry-go-round at the tcm movie database