watan ke rakhwale (transl.saviour of the nation)  is a 1987 indian drama thriller film directed by t. rama rao, starring ashok kumar, sunil dutt, dharmendra, mithun chakraborty, sridevi, moushumi chatterjee, puneet issar, prem chopra, shakti kapoor and kader khan.


== plot ==
radha pratap (sridevi) lives a wealthy lifestyle with her widowed businessman dad raja pratap (sudhir dalvi), her maternal grandmother (lalita pawar) and paternal uncle, dr. narendra (prem chopra), who runs a mental hospital. shortly after her father dies in a car accident, her marriage is arranged with equally wealthy naresh puri (dan dhanoa), the only child of raj puri (kader khan). when the marriage is about to be finalized, a man named arun (mithun chakraborty) interrupts the ceremony, informing them that radha is already married to him, and produces proof and a witness, professor peter fernandes (ashok kumar).
the wedding is cancelled amidst chaos as radha claims that she had never seen arun, leave alone married him. a few days later, narendra and raj ask radha to sign a divorce petition, which will annul the marriage so that she will be free to marry naresh, which she does sign. when the time comes for her to move out, she refuses and admits that she made a mistake and admits having been married to arun, who lives with his brother, suraj prakash (sunil dutt), a jailor and his wife laxmi (moushumi chatterjee). a few days later, naresh is arrested by the police for smuggling, and lodged in a jail, where he is killed by a convict named mahaveer (dharmendra), who had seen naresh sexually molest his sister, vimla (divya rana). enraged at the death of his son, raj has his men molest and threaten laxmi. shortly thereafter narendra's body is found, knifed to death.
suraj confesses to this crime, is arrested, tried in court and sentenced to 6 years in the very jail where he used to be the jailor. raj arranges the abduction of radha, laxmi and arun and has them confined on an island that is not within the jurisdiction of any country. the questions remain, why did arun claim that radha is married to him? why did suraj confess to kill narendra? and what is going to be the fate of raj's victims?


== cast ==
mithun chakraborty as arun prakash
ashok kumar as professor peter fernandes
sunil dutt as jailor suraj prakash
dharmendra as mahaveer
sridevi as radha pratap
moushumi chatterjee as laxmi prakash
puneet issar as akbar (arun's assistant)
prem chopra as dr. narendra pratap
shakti kapoor as koya koya attache
kader khan as raj puri
parikshit sahni as assistant jailor madan
chandrashekhar as police commissioner
lalita pawar as radha's maternal grandmother
ashalata wabgaonkar as mahaveer's mother
divya rana as vimla "vimli" (mahaveer's sister)
birbal as psychiatrist
sudhir dalvi as raja pratap
dan dhanoa as naresh puri
mac mohan as mac
jack gaud as raj puri's goon
baby guddu as young vimla


== songs ==


== box office ==
the film was a super hit and seventh highest-grossing movie of 1987.


== references ==


== external links ==
watan ke rakhwale at imdb