we are family is a 2010 indian drama film directed by siddharth malhotra and produced by hiroo yash johar and karan johar under dharma productions, with sony pictures entertainment and utv motion pictures handling the distribution rights. the film features kajol, arjun rampal and kareena kapoor in the lead roles, and is an official remake of the 1998 film stepmom. it released worldwide on 3 september 2010, and a day before in india and uae. upon release, it received positive reviews from critics. kajol and kapoor's performances were much acclaimed.


== plot ==
maya is a former book publisher and a perfect mother whose life revolves around her three children, aaliya, ankush, and anjali. despite being divorced from aman, maya has ensured that they remain a happy family unit. however, things take an unexpected turn when aman's girlfriend, shreya arora, a career-oriented fashion designer with a lot to learn about children, joins the family.
when aman introduces shreya at anjali's birthday party, she accidentally drops anjali's birthday cake, which leads the children to perceive her as evil. at a fashion show, anjali helps shreya with one of the outfits for the models. when shreya goes to get ice cream for the children, aaliya tells her siblings that she is using them so she can take their father away, and anjali goes missing after. at the police station, anjali is found and aman tells shreya that she cannot go near the children without maya's permission.
maya finds out that she has cervical cancer and tells aman, which prompts him to move back in with the family and leave shreya. however, he is unable to forget her, which maya notices. maya tells their children that she has cancer and aaliya retaliates by going to a party with an older boy. maya then tells shreya that she has cancer, and tells her she wants her to take care of the kids after she's gone, as theyll need a mother in their lives. shreya refuses at first, not believing herself to be the mom type, but agrees to move in and leave her career. in the following days, the children develop an attachment towards shreya but when maya and shreya have an argument, it is revealed that shreya is an orphan. after the argument, aman tells maya that they should not be competing with each other for the children's love. maya faints and is brought to the hospital, where the doctor tells her that she has only a few days left. shreya decides to take care of the children while aman tends to maya.
when shreya and the children go to visit maya at the hospital, the two women have a private conversation. shreya admits that the children need their real mother, not her. maya bequeaths guardianship of the children to shreya, and confesses a mistake she made that almost killed anjali. she explains to shreya that not every mother is perfect but that she needs to keep trying. maya tells aman she wants to return home for diwali as the last chance to see her house before she dies. during the festival, the children hold a special event for her, replaying the memories they had together. when they take a family photograph, maya asks shreya to join, as she is now family. 
ten years later, it is aaliyas wedding and shreya gifts her a bracelet which belonged to maya. shreya speaks to the family portrait and says to mayas photo that she eventually became the mom type. during the marriage rounds, shreya looks at the sky and recalls maya saying she had their yesterday and shreya has their tomorrow and she smiles.


== cast ==
kajol as maya, aman's first wife, aaliya, ankush and anjali's mother
kareena kapoor as shreya arora, aman's girlfriend turned wife, aaliya, ankush and anjali's step-mother
arjun rampal as aman, shreya's husband, maya's ex husband, aaliya, ankush and anjali's father
aanchal munjal as aaliya, aman and maya's eldest daughter, shreya's step-daughter
nominath ginsberg as ankush, aman and maya's only son, shreya's step-son
diya sonecha as anjali, aman and maya's youngest daughter, shreya's step-daughter
iravati harshe as dr. rati malhotra, maya's doctor
amrita prakash as elder aaliya (cameo)
ankit malik as elder ankush (cameo)
dingy vira as elder anjali (cameo)


== production ==
karan johar decided to adapt stepmom for the indian audience with a working title 'love you maa'. although he initially intended to buy the rights to the film, he eventually opted to co-produce it with sony pictures.the film was shot in sydney, australia and mumbai from november 2009 to april 2010. according to siddharth malhotra, several scenes involving racial prejudice against the children were cut to avoid the appearance of using the controversy over violence against indians in australia to promote the film.


== soundtrack ==
the album has six original songs composed by shankar ehsaan loy and lyrics by irshad kamil and anvita dutt guptan, including a tribute to elvis presley's "jailhouse rock".
"ankhon mein neendein"  rahat fateh ali khan & shreya ghoshal (5:02)
"dil khol ke let's rock"  anushka manchanda, akriti kakkar & suraj jagan (03:57)
"reham o karam"  vishal dadlani & shankar mahadevan (05:47)
"hamesha & forever"  sonu nigam & shreya ghoshal (04:51)
"sun le dua yeh aasmaan (theme slow version)"  bela shende (03:53)
"we are family (theme)"  (02:48)


== reception ==


=== critical response ===
upon release, the film received positive reviews from critics. ians rated the film 4 out of 5 saying, "we are family" is equally appealing from the outside and at the heart".


=== box office performance ===
the film grossed about 27 million on opening day and collected a total of 205 million at the end of its second week. at the end of its theatrical run, it grossed 220 million and was eventually declared flop we are family performed well overseas, particularly in the uk. the movie was declared "flop" by box office india.


=== award ===
kareena kapoor won the filmfare award for best supporting actress at the 56th filmfare awards.


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
we are family at imdb 
we are family at bollywood hungama