we joined the navy is a 1962 british comedy film directed by wendy toye and starring kenneth more, lloyd nolan, joan o'brien, derek fowlds, graham crowden, esma cannon and john le mesurier. produced by daniel m. angel, it was based on the novel of the same name by john winton a former royal navy lieutenant commander.
the film was shot on location in villefranche-sur-mer, near nice and monaco, on board the royal naval college, dartmouth, and uss springfield as well as abpc elstree studios.in addition to the credited cast, there were uncredited cameos from michael bentine, sidney james, rodney bewes and dirk bogarde (in a gag reference to his doctor series role, simon sparrow).


== plot ==
lieutenant commander robert badger is an excellent naval officer with one major problem.  he speaks the truth at the most inopportune times that lead him to being transferred from ship, to shore, and then to instruct at the royal naval college.  when his remarks are repeated by one of his students to his father, an anti-military member of parliament he has one last chance.  he and three problem midshipmen are sent as exchange officers to the flagship of the united states sixth fleet. their antics set back anglo-american relations until they go ashore to a nation in a midst of a revolution.


== cast ==
kenneth more as lieutenant commander robert badger
lloyd nolan as vice admiral ryan
joan o'brien as lieutenant carol blair
mischa auer as colonel & president
jeremy lloyd as dewberry jr.
dinsdale landen as bowles
derek fowlds as carson
denise warren as collette
john le mesurier as george dewberry sr.
lally bowers as mrs. cynthia dewberry, his wife
laurence naismith as admiral blake
andrew cruickshank as admiral filmer
walter fitzgerald as admiral thomas
john phillips as rear admiral
ronald leigh-hunt as commander royal navy
arthur lovegrove as chief petty officer froud
brian wilde as petty officer gibbons
david warner as sailor painting ship
john barrard as consul
sean kelly  as sinjett
marie france as francoise
alexis kanner as gerrit
warren mitchell as 'honest' marcel
kenneth griffith as orator
neil mccarthy as the sergeant
tutte lemkow as the corporal
dirk bogarde as dr simon sparrow (cameos appearance uncredited)


== dvd ==
a region 2 dvd of we joined the navy was released by network on 16 february 2015. the disc features a 2.35:1 anamorphic transfer.


== references ==


== external links ==
we joined the navy at imdb