whistle is a 2003 tamil slasher film directed by j. d. & jerry, which is a remake of the american slasher film urban legend (1998).  the film has  debutant vikramaditya and sherin in the lead roles alongside vivek, gayathri raguram, divyadarshini, livingston, bhanu chander, mayuri, and vaishnavi, among others, in supporting roles. although the film was an average grosser, its music, composed by d. imman, became successful.


== plot ==
the film begins with sj arts and science college student, swetha getting murdered in her car, on a highway. no one hears from her since. she had a group of friends from her college. it consists of jeeva, the college magazine editor, anjali, bharath, vinod, the college prankster, meera, a drug addict and anjali's roommate, sharmi, operator at the college radio station and maya, the rj at the radio station. jeeva and anjali are lovers whereas maya has a crush on jeeva.
the college is famous for the stories of a serial killing entity naga, a hoax, as said by many. but professor pannerselvam still believes it. there is an old laboratory behind the college which was first built with the college. but a fire that happened in 1987, has killed all the occupants. since then, the old lab is rumoured to be naga's secret residence. maya and anjali have a bet and go to the abandoned place at night and encounter vinod, who pranks them.
professor panner then lectures to the student about naga. the name naga(nagammal, shortly naga). nagammal and a british soldier fell in love with each other thus, her own brother kills her by burying her alive. a temple was built over it and the college was built after demolishing the temple. since then, naga is rumoured to be murdering people around. vinod later tries to trick people but after he gets tricked on by black magic but it turns out that he actually faked it. yet, professor panner is sceptical about it.
swetha's death comes to light but it is framed as an accident. anjali strongly thinks it's no accident as swetha is an excellent driver. inspector syed suspects it must be one of swetha father's business rival. vinod brings anjali to an abandoned woods behind the college and tries to make a move on her. anjali rejects as she is in love with jeeva. soon vinod is killed by getting hanged. it happens to be naga and anjali freaks out. she runs back to the hostel and brings baji, the hostel watchman to the site. but to her horror, vinod wasn't there, nor was his car. it seems like hardly, there were any struggle or murder. devastated and confused, anjali confines in here friends.
no one actually believes her as vinod is known for his pranks. still skeptical, anjali gets more confused. in between all these things, professor panner and jeeva are shown to be acting suspicious. anjali goes to the library and discovers a book on naga. she sees some illustrations which are exactly the same as how vinod died. maya and sharmi joins her and they tease her. sharmi realizes that vinod was the last one to borrow the book and it is obvious, that he played a prank on anjali.
that night meera gets attacked in her room by naga. anjali comes there and she hears meera moaning as the killer had covered her mouth, she thinks she is only using drugs. she doesn't switch on the light and leaves to take a shower. when she comes out, anjali sees meera dead and screams. inspector syed comes there once again to investigate. it is then revealed that meera had a very depressing life and that is why she got addicted to drugs.
anjali then moves to sharmi's room. later, jeeva comes there with an old magazine about the laboratory fire incident. they both find out that professor panner was the only survivor there. they, together with maya, break into professor panner's room to have a look. when they hear someone coming, the 3 of them hide inside a secret room behind the shelf. all wait patiently for the person to leave. when they hear the doorknob lock, they relax. suddenly anjali screams. jeeva and maya realize she screamed because of the naga outfit behind them. they see a mask with a snake embroidery, black cloak and an axe. anjali said that a similar axe was used to kill meera. all their suspicion falls on panner. when they leave the place, panner is shown to be there and he warns them.
vinod's mother comes to the college and creates a chaos when she realizes that her son is dead. frustrated, jeeva tarnishes panner in the college magazine. as a result, the principal suspends jeeva for one week while a shocking truth about anjali is told. anjali has a police record from her school days. when jeeva asks her, she refuses to tell him and they break up. jeeva starts to doubt her. later on, he has an argument with professor panneer in the bar where they blame each other.
maya confides in her friends that all the murders that have happened and whatever anjali said was true. it was indeed according to the illustrations in the book. they figure out that the next murder can happened anywhere in the college. anjali freaks out when a figure looking similar to naga is seen near a swimming pool where maya is swimming. but it turns out that it is just a garbage man. when maya asks her, anjali reveals that she suspects that the murders might be related to an incident that happened in her school days.
during anjali's school days, all of them in their group, except for maya and jeeva, went to the same school. during the school carnival on their final year, whistle day, all of them ragged a junior student named sarawathi. anjali's friends pretended like they have taken a nude picture of sarawathi. embarrassed, sarawathi hangs herself in the classroom much to the others' shock. due to their age, the 6 of them get the least punishment of 6 months. when anjali finishes, she tells maya that 3 of them are dead and she is scared. jeeva listens to them and leaves. it is revealed that he has sarawathi's picture in his book, which arises the suspicion.
during the college annual day function, barath is locked in the men's toilet and killed shortly afterwards. his disappearance starts bothering the group. soon professor panner is also killed. maya and anjali go to jeeva's home, where they discover panner's dead body. when jeeva finds them, anjali hits him on the head and informs inspector syed. they flee the place. when syed comes there, both jeeva and panner are not in the site.
maya and anjali are confident that jeeva is the killer. they wait for sharmi that night and sharmi says she sees jeeva in the radio station. but before anjali and maya can warn her that jeeva is the killer, sharmi is killed by naga, right in front of them. they flee the place but get separated. anjali goes to the burnt laboratory and there, she discovers, vinod, panner and barath's dead bodies. she later sees maya tied to a bed but maya wakes up and ties anjali to the bed.
at the same time, jeeva and syed fight and jeeva reveals that there are two nagas. it is revealed that there are indeed two nagas, maya and baji, who have been committing the murders. maya tells anjali that sarawathi is her younger sister and her parents passed away after hearing the news that sara died. baji was their house servant and raised and supported sara from when she was young. both of them joined the college to take revenge and that they had to kill panner as he found out the truth.
baji and maya then plan to bury anjali alive just like nagamma. but jeeva comes and rescues her. baji is killed and maya is shot by syed.
years later, a new group of college students are studying once again about naga. some of the students do not believe in naga's story and when asked who still believed the myth, it is revealed that maya, who comes to the site, says that she generally believes in the myth of naga and also states that all the naga stories begin like this. indicating that she is going to kill the group of students who do not believe in the story.


== cast ==


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack was composed by d. imman.


== references ==


== external links ==
whistle at imdb