white tiger (russian:  , translit. belyy tigr) is a 2012 russian war film, directed by karen shakhnazarov and co-written with aleksandr borodyansky based on the novel tankist, ili "belyy tigr" (the tank crewman, tanker or the white tiger) by russian novelist ilya boyashov. the film is about a badly wounded soviet tank commander on the eastern front of world war ii who becomes obsessed with tracking down and destroying a mysterious, invincible nazi tank, which the soviet troops call the "white tiger". the soviets design a new, more powerful t-34 tank and assign the tank commander the job of destroying the white tiger.
the film was selected as the russian entry for the best foreign language oscar at the 85th academy awards, but it did not make the final shortlist.


== plot ==
after an eastern front tank battle in the summer of 1943, a tank driver is found alive in a disabled soviet tank, among other wrecked vehicles. miraculously recovering from burns over 90% of his body with no scarring, he has retrograde amnesia: he does not know who he is, but retains all his skills. he is given the name ivan naydnov (from the russian word , "found") and returned to duty (because standing orders allow no exceptions). naydnov believes he can communicate with tanks as if they were people, though he tries not to advertise this.
in the meantime, rumors arise about a new, invincible nazi tank that appears seemingly out of nowhere, wreaks destruction and disappears back into the forest. a captured german soldier describes it as a tiger (p) painted completely in white. this mysterious tank is dubbed the "white tiger" by the soviet and german forces. naydnov remembers something from his past: he was injured by this tank, and the tank is dead.
in response to this threat, the soviets build a prototype tank, an upgraded version of a t-34/85 with stronger armor, a more powerful engine, and only needing three crew members. the best of the best are chosen for the crew: naydnov, the commander and driver; kryuk, the gunner; and berdyev, the loader. naydnov is ordered to destroy the white tiger. he hides his tank in a hole dug in the forest and uses another t-34 to lure the white tiger into an ambush. the white tiger appears, destroys the other t-34 and hits naydnov's tank from behind at close range, but only inflicts minor damage before inexplicably retreating back into the forest. the soviets  believe the tiger sank into the swamp behind the forest, but naydnov is sure it is still out there.
naydnov believes in "the tank god". he thinks the tank god wants him to destroy the white tiger. he believes this is why he can understand the tanks and why he survives his battles, he thinks that when shells are fired at him his own tank warns him of the incoming danger and he avoids it. naydnov becomes obsessed with finding the mysterious nazi tank. he is convinced that the enemy tank is unmanned, a ghost of the war. counterintelligence major fedotov comes to believe naydnov and assists him. a captured german officer also reveals that he has no knowledge of this tiger, and he remarks that the legend of the death tank is generating fear rather than hope in the german army.
while advancing, a soviet tank force is attacked by the white tiger, which destroys a tank with just about every single shot it fires. when it withdraws, naydnov gives chase in his tank and comes upon an abandoned village. he detects and destroys a panzer iv concealed in a barn, then comes upon the white tiger and engages it. kryuk hits it, disabling its turret, but while maneuvering, naydnov's t-34's gun barrel gets some mud stuck in it; the barrel explodes when kryuk tries to finish off the enemy. the white tiger retreats.
fedotov attempts to convince his commanding general that both the white tiger and the "born-again" naydnov are creations not of man, but of the war itself. the general is unconvinced and sends him on a ten-day leave.
after the battle of berlin and the unconditional surrender of nazi germany in may 1945, fedotov meets naydnov in a field and tries to convince him to go home, saying that the war is over. naydnov disagrees, saying that the war will not truly end until the white tiger is destroyed. he believes it is just biding its time, for 20, 50, maybe 100 years. fedotov returns to his vehicle; when he turns around, naydnov has vanished along with his tank.
in the final scene, hitler is shown seated in a large room with a fireplace, talking to a shadowy stranger and defending his actions during the war. his monologue begins with an observation that he and germany will from now on be seen as monsters, then proceeds with an insinuation that the destruction of the jews and his attack on russia was only a realization of what all of europe silently wanted and were uneasy to openly admit. he finally ends with saying that war has no beginning or end and that it is the original human state.


== cast ==


== see also ==
list of submissions to the 85th academy awards for best foreign language film
list of russian submissions for the academy award for best foreign language film


== references ==


== external links ==
white tiger at imdb
white tiger at rotten tomatoes