winnie mandela is a 2011 drama film adaptation of anne marie du preez bezrob's biography winnie mandela: a life. the film is directed by darrell roodt, and stars jennifer hudson, terrence howard, wendy crewson,  elias koteas, and justin strydom. image entertainment released the film in theaters on september 6, 2013.


== plot ==
following the life of winnie madikizela-mandela (jennifer hudson), from her strict rural upbringing by a father disappointed she was not born a boy, to her giving up the chance to study in america in order to remain in south africa where she felt more needed, through her husband nelson mandela's (terrence howard) imprisonment.  she then faces continuous harassment by the security police, banishment to a small orange free state town, betrayal by friends and allies, and more than a year in solitary confinement.  upon her release, she continues her husband's activism against apartheid and, after his release from prison, suffers divorce due to her infidelity and political pressures.  she also faces accusations of violence and murder and in the end, must own up to her actions in court, while many still remain loyal to her because of her fight against apartheid.


== cast ==
jennifer hudson as winnie mandela
terrence howard as nelson mandela
wendy crewson as mary botha
elias koteas as major de vries
justin strydom as chief policeman
aubrey poo as peter magubane
jonathan rands as judge de wet
hlomla dandala as oliver tambo
leleti khumalo as adelaide tambo
clive scott as judge fl rumpff
john whiteley as cecil williams
nhlanhilo milo as zenani mandela
zinhle mabena as zindzi mandela
damon berry as rev verryn
fezile mpela  as cyril ramaphosa
deon lotz as f.w. de klerk
zibuse zihle  as walter sisulu
albert maritz as chris hattingh


== production ==
writers andre pieterse and darrell roodt, who also directed, developed the screenplay based on anne marie du preez bezrob's biography winnie mandela: a life.  the film was produced by equinoxe films.  filming took place in johannesburg, cape town, and robben island in south africa beginning in april 2010.


== controversy ==
winnie mandela criticized the fact that she was not consulted for the making of a film about her life, stating, "i have absolutely nothing against jennifer [hudson, the film's star], but i have everything against the movie itself.  i was not consulted. i am still alive, and i think that it is a total disrespect to come to south africa, make a movie about my struggle, and call that movie some translation of a romantic life of winnie mandela."some south african actors also criticized the selection of american actors for south african roles; oupa lebogo, general secretary of the creative worker's union (cwu) said of hudson's casting, "this decision must be reversed, it must be stopped now. if the matter doesn't come up for discussion, we will push for a moratorium to be placed on the film being cast in south africa. we are being undermined, there is no respect at all."a preview of the film released in november 2010 was referred to by the filmmakers as originating from computer hackers, saying it was an "unauthorised download originated from a secure website belonging to our sales representative, filmbridge ... the material was not formally edited, graded or sound-mixed. at this stage, the producers have elected to make no further comment and are investigating the matter."


== release and reception ==
the film premiered at the toronto international film festival in september 2011.by april 2012, t.d. jakes and his company tdj enterprises/film bridge international had taken over the production, distribution and marketing of the film.  it was released to a limited number of theatres in canada on october 5, 2012. on may 16, 2013, image entertainment acquired the rights to release the film in north america.the film holds a 15% rating on rotten tomatoes based on reviews from 34 critics. the site's consensus states, "winnie mandela takes few chances and delves only superficially into its subject's life, making it feel more like a too-earnest made-for-tv movie than a proper biopic." rick groen of the globe and mail says, "winnie begins as hagiography and ends in hellish confusion," and linda barnard of the toronto star said, "it won't satisfy history students curious about this polarizing figure, nor fans of its star, oscar winner jennifer hudson." david rooney of the hollywood reporter stated, "solid performances are undercut by lack of storytelling integrity in this plodding biopic," and ed gibbs of the guardian said, "this syrupy biography of the former wife of nelson mandela seeks to sugar-coat south africa's complex history."


== references ==


== external links ==
winnie mandela at imdb