manoj kumar (born harikishan giri goswami; 24 july 1937), also known as bharat kumar, is an indian actor and film director in bollywood. he is remembered for his versatile performances in films like hariyali aur raasta, woh kaun thi?, himalay ki god mein, do badan, upkar, patthar ke sanam, neel kamal, purab aur paschim, beimaan, roti kapda aur makaan, dus numbri, shor, sanyasi, and kranti. he is known for acting in and directing films with patriotic themes.
in 1992, he was awarded with the padma shri by the government of india. india's highest award in cinema, the dadasaheb phalke award, was awarded to him in 2015.


== early life ==
kumar was born in abbottabad, a town in the north-west frontier province, british india (now in khyber pakhtunkhwa, pakistan). his original birth name was harikishan giri goswami. when he was 10, his family had to migrate from jandiala sher khan to delhi due to the partition. his family lived as refugees in vijay nagar, kingsway camp and later moved to old rajendra nagar area of new delhi.
after graduating from hindu college, university of delhi, he decided to enter the film industry.


== career ==
when he was young, he admired actors dilip kumar, ashok kumar and kamini kaushal and decided to name himself manoj kumar, after dilip kumar's character in shabnam.after making a little-noticed dbut in fashion in 1957, kumar landed his first leading role in kaanch ki gudia (1960) opposite saida khan. piya milan ki aas and reshmi roomal followed, setting the stage for the vijay bhatt-directed hariyali aur raasta (1962) opposite mala sinha. kumar then appeared with sadhana in raj khosla's woh kaun thi (1964), and reunited with vijay bhatt and mala sinha in himalaya ki god mein (1965). kumar and raj khosla repeated their successful actor-director partnership with the film do badan, which was remembered for many reasons, including raj khosla's direction, kumar and the heroine asha parekh's performance and songs written by the lyricist shakeel badayuni, among others.


=== film work ===
in the 1960s his successful films included romantic films like honeymoon, apna banake dekho, naqli nawab, paththar ke sanam, sajan and sawan ki ghata and social films such as shaadi, grihasti, apne huwe paraye, and aadmi and thrillers such as gumnaam, anita, and woh kaun thi and comedy film like picnic.
kumar's starred in the 1965 film shaheed, based on the life of bhagat singh, the independence revolutionary. after the indo-pakistani war of 1965, prime minister lal bahadur shastri asked him to create a film based on the popular slogan jai jawan jai kissan (hail the soldier, hail the farmer).the result was kumar's directorial debut upkaar (1967). in this award-winning film, he played both a soldier and a farmer. the film was also noted for the famous song "mere desh ki dharti", written by gulshan bawra, composed by kalyanji-anandji and sung by mahendra kapoor. upkaar was declared a blockbuster and won him his first filmfare best director award.
he returned to patriotic themes in purab aur paschim (1970), in which life in the east and west are juxtaposed. the film pehchaan directed by sohanlal kanwar had kumar opposite babita and was successful.
in 1972, he starred in be-imaan (for which he won the filmfare best actor award) and later directed and starred in shor (1972). the latter, opposite nanda, was not a huge box office success on its release, but has gained cult status over the years. it featured the memorable song "ek pyar ka nagma hai", a duet by lata mangeshkar and mukesh, which was composed by laxmikant-pyarelal and written by santosh anand.
he consistently liked working with actors prem nath, pran, prem chopra, kamini kaushal and hema malini in his career. his closest friends from the industry included raj kapoor, mukesh, mahendra kapoor, dharmendra, rajendra kumar, shashi kapoor and rajesh khanna. 


=== peak of his career ===
in the mid-1970s kumar starred in three hit films; roti kapda aur makaan (1974) which was a social commentary, featuring an all-star cast including zeenat aman, shashi kapoor and amitabh bachchan.  he won his second filmfare award for best director for the film roti kapda makan.  sanyasi (1975),a religious-themed comedy, had kumar and hema malini in the lead roles and film was hugely successful. dus numbri (1976) also gave kumar, pran, prem nath and hema top billing.
in 1981, kumar reached the peak of his career when he got the opportunity to direct his idol, dilip kumar, as well as to star in kranti, a story about the struggle for indian independence in the 19th century. kranti was the last notable successful hindi film in his career. he also starred in the hit punjabi film jat punjabi.


=== later career ===
after kranti in 1981, kumar's career began to decline, when the films he did with him in lead role like kalyug aur ramayan in 1987 and later clerk in 1989 failed at the box office. in 1989, he cast pakistani actors mohammad ali and zeba in his film clerk. he quit acting after his appearance in the 1995 film maidan-e-jung. he directed his son, kunal goswami, in the 1999 film jai hind which had a patriotic theme. the film was a flop and was the last film kumar worked on.
he was awarded the filmfare lifetime achievement award in 1999 for a career spanning over 40 years.
his trademark hand-covering-the-face was very popular and continues to be the butt of jokes of latter day stand-up comedians. in 2007, the shah rukh khan film om shanti om featured the lead character pretending to be manoj kumar so as to sneak into a movie premiere, by holding his hand over his face. kumar filed a lawsuit, which was settled out of court.


== politics ==
like many other bollywood stars, kumar decided to enter politics following his retirement. before the 2004 general election in india, he officially joined bjp


== personal life ==
manoj kumar is married to shashi goswami (originally from jodhkan, sirsa district, haryana). he has two sons, vishal and kunal. vishal attempted a career as a singer and kunal, an actor. his brother, rajiv goswami, also entered the film industry, but none were able to gain a footing in bollywood.


== awards ==


=== civilian award ===
2020 wbr golden era of bollywood award.
1992  padma shri by the government of india


=== national film awards ===
1968  national film award for second best feature film for upkaar
2016  dadasaheb phalke award lifetime contribution to indian cinema


=== state awards ===
2008  national kishore kumar award by the government of madhya pradesh.
2010  national raj kapoor award by the government of maharashtra.


=== filmfare awards ===
winner

1968  filmfare best movie award for upkaar
1968  filmfare best director award for upkaar
1968  filmfare best story award for upkaar
1968  filmfare best dialogue award for upkaar
1972  filmfare best actor award for beimaan
1972 - filmfare award for best editing for shor
1975  filmfare best director award for roti kapda aur makaan
1999  filmfare lifetime achievement awardnominated

1968  filmfare best actor award for upkaar
1969  filmfare best supporting actor award  for aadmi
1973  filmfare best director award for shor
1975  filmfare best movie award for roti kapda aur makaan
1975  filmfare best actor award  for roti kapda aur makaan
1976  filmfare best actor award  for sanyasi


=== other awards ===
1968  bfja awards: best dialogue for upkaar.
2001  kalakar awards for lifetime achievement.
2007  sardar patel life time achievement international award.
2008  star screen lifetime achievement award.
2009  phalke ratna award by the dadasaheb phalke academy.
2010  lifetime achievement award at the 12th mumbai film festival.
2012  lifetime achievement award at the apsara film & television producers guild award.
2012  lifetime achievement award at the nashik international film festival.
2012  "bharat gaurav award" in new jersey, united states.
2013  lifetime achievement award at the jagran film festival.
2019 - lifetime achievement award from power brands at bfja (bollywood film journalist's awards)


== other honours ==
2008  to honour manoj kumar, the government of madhya pradesh decided to institute a rs 100,000 award in his name. the state government also recommended kumar's name for bharat ratna to the central government.
2011  in recognition of the devotion of manoj kumar towards shri sai baba, the shri saibaba sansthan trust in shirdi renamed "pimpalwadi road" in shirdi as "manojkumar goswami road".


== selected filmography ==


== references ==


== external links ==
manoj kumar: bollywood's own mr bharat
manoj kumar : profile, gallery, photos, videos, news
manoj kumar at imdb