woman walks ahead is a 2017 american biographical drama western film directed by susanna white and written by steven knight. the film is the story of caroline weldon (jessica chastain), a portrait painter who travels from new york city to the dakotas to paint a portrait of sitting bull (michael greyeyes) in 1890. chaske spencer and sam rockwell also star.
the film premiered at the toronto international film festival september 10, 2017. it was released through directv cinema on may 31, 2018, before being released in a limited release on june 29, 2018, by a24.


== premise ==
caroline weldon, a swiss-american portrait painter travels from brooklyn to the dakotas in the 1890s to paint a portrait of sitting bull and becomes embroiled in the lakota peoples' struggle over the rights to their land.


== cast ==
jessica chastain as caroline weldon, sitting bulls confidante and adviser
michael greyeyes as sitting bull
sam rockwell as colonel silas grove
ciarn hinds as james mclaughlin, an indian agent
michael nouri as karl valentine
chaske spencer as chaska, a local lawman
bill camp as general cook
rulan tangen as susan mclaughlin
rachel singer as dry goods assistant
louisa krause as loretta
lyle sandoval as tracker


== production ==
on february 3, 2016, it was reported that jessica chastain was in talks to play sitting bull's confidante in woman walks ahead, directed by susanna white. on september 14, 2016, michael greyeyes, sam rockwell, ciarn hinds, chaske spencer, and bill camp joined the cast, with principal photography having begun in new mexico.


== release ==

the film had its world premiere at the toronto international film festival on september 10, 2017. shortly after, a24 and directv cinema acquired distribution rights to the film. its u.s. premiere was at the tribeca film festival on april 25, 2018.it was released through directv cinema on may 31, 2018, before being released in a limited release on june 29, 2018.


== reception ==
on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 53% based on 38 reviews, and an average rating of 5.89/10. the site's critical consensus reads, "woman walks ahead gets some extra mileage out of watchable work from jessica chastain and michael greyeyes, but uneven pacing and two-dimensional characters undermine their efforts." on metacritic, which assigns a rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 51 out of 100, based on 19 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews".despite mixed reviews, michael greyeyes received critical acclaim for his portrayal of sitting bull. the new york times critic jeannette catsoulis called his performance "a miracle of intelligence and dignity". rogerebert.com contributor susan wloszczyna raved about his performance, calling it "the most subtle, soulful, and believable". los angeles times and village voice described his presence as captivating as wry wit and quiet gravity while the latter described his performance as "stirring".


== references ==


== external links ==
woman walks ahead at imdb