yamaleela is a telugu-language film released in 1994. the film was directed by s. v. krishna reddy, introducing comedian ali as the hero for the first time. this film was a huge box office success. this film was later remade in hindi as taqdeerwala, with venkatesh and raveena tandon and in tamil as lucky man, starring kartik, sanghavi and manjula. a sequel for the movie titled yamaleela 2 was released on november 2014.


== plot ==
suraj (ali) is a mischievous guy and his mother (manju bhargavi) is disappointed with his behavior. suraj comes to know about his mother's past, his father is a zamindar and owner of a palace called swarna palace, who died because of debts and they lost their entire property. suraj swears on his mother to again buy their palace in any circumstances and make his mother happy. lilly (indraja) is a petty thief, a very greedy woman and suraj falls in love with her at first sight, but she turns him down. thota ramudu (tanikella bharani), a rowdy opponent to lilly, teases suraj a lot and he falls sick.
meanwhile, in hell, yama, the god of death (kaikala satyanarayana) and chitragupta (brahmanandam) misplace a book called bhavishyavaani, which shows the future of man. the book somehow falls on the roof of suraj's house, he benefits a lot by reading predictions of the future in the book and becomes rich and thota ramudu is surprised how suraj became rich in a short time. lord brahma warns yama and chitragupta that within one month they should find the book, otherwise they lose their supernatural powers. on earth, suraj again buys their palace and takes her mother to it and he asks her mother if she wants anything else. she asks him to get married, so suraj again opens the book to see whether his marriage will happen with lilly or not. he then reads that his mother will die that night at 10 pm. to fulfill his mother's last wish, suraj plays a marriage drama with lilly, but accidentally his mother does not die and lilly reveals all this drama which leads to his mother's anger and she stops talking to him until he really brings back lilly as her daughter-in-law.
meanwhile, yama and chitragupta reach earth in search of the book. as they reach earth, they face a lot of problems as everyone thinks of them as some drama company artists. suraj saves them once and realizes that they are the real yama and chitragupta and his mother didn't die because they do not have the book. to protect his mother, suraj traps yama with the help of a girl lata. after some time, yama gets to know the truth and also understands that the book is with suraj. yama asks him to give back the book, but he refuses. from that day, they try for the book in many ways, but fail. one day thota ramudu beats suraj very badly for the secret behind his success, but he doesn't reveal it. yama saves him and asks him why all this, he says for his mother's sake, then yama understands his devotion towards her. yamraj wants to meet her, suraj invites them to his house without knowing their real faces and accidentally yama blesses suraj's mother for complete life.
meanwhile,thota ramudu wants to know the secret behind suraj's success, and he asks lilly to go and find out the secret. lilly plays a love drama with suraj and asks him the secret, he refuses to reveal it, she finally says he has to make a choice of her or his mother, then without any hesitation he chooses his mother and throws her out, then she understands his affection towards his mother and his love towards her. finally, thota ramudu kidnaps suraj's mother and blackmails him for the book. yama takes advantage of the situation and suraj gives the book to thota ramudu. yama destroys him and collects the book. finally, yama comes to take suraj mother's life, but she has complete life because of his blessings.


== cast ==


== crew ==
direction: s. v. krishna reddy
screenplay: s. v. krishna reddy
music: s. v. krishna reddy
story: s. v. krishna reddy
dance: suchitra chandrabose
playback singers: s. p. balasubrahmanyam, k. s. chithra
editor : k. ramgopal reddy
dialogue : diwakar babu
lyrics : bhuvana chandra, sirivennela seetharama sastry, jonnavittula ramalingeswara rao
art : r. s. raju
photography : sarat, k. rajendraprasad
producer : kishore rati, achchi reddy
banner : manisha films


== soundtrack ==


== remakes ==


== references ==


== external links ==
yamaleela at imdb