yeh vaada raha is a 1982 hindi romance film starring rishi kapoor, poonam dhillon, tina munim, rakhee gulzar and shammi kapoor.  it is based on danielle steel's novel and made into the american film the promise.


== plot ==
vikram rai bahadur is the only son of wealthy mrs. sharda.
while vacationing in srinagar, he meets a singer,  sunita sikkan and falls in love with her.
soon he proposes marriage to her,  they go to the temple where they had first laid eyes on each other and vow to never part till death, even tying the symbol of their love, a necklace vicky had won for sunita in a fair, around a wishing pole.
vikram goes back to delhi, to ask his mother's permission to marry sunita, but she refuses. she also says that if sunita's name is joined to theirs, their business will suffer.
vikram goes back to kashmir and tells sunita they will have a quiet temple wedding. on their way to the temple, they have a car crash with an oncoming truck. raja suffer minor injuries vikram is in an induced coma due to a brain injury and sunita survives also but her face gets badly disfigured. 
mrs. sharda goes to see sunita & tells sunita about her disfigurement and says " how will vikram live a disfigured girl?"
sunita agrees to stay away from vikram & transferred to a hospital in delhi, dr. mehra restores her disfigurement by plastic surgery.
mrs sharda tells vikram sunita died in the crash.
months pass and vikram is mourning. meanwhile sunita undergoes several operations & is transformed.
looking forward to meet vikram she calls him to tell him she's coming but catches herself in the mirror and realises she's completely different now.
dr. mehra, who now sees sunita as his daughter, reassures her that in love one's face does not matter, the heart and the soul remains the same and that is what brings two lovers together.
sunita and dr. mehra turn up at vikram's house only to find out that he is getting engaged to another woman named rita.
vikram doesn't recognize sunita and she believes that he has forgotten her. she returns home with her new father (dr. mehra) and decides to change her name to kusum mehra, to begin life anew. 
after the engagement party, it is revealed that vikram is making an orphanage in the memory of sunita in srinagar & will be raising money by singing on stage.
on one such performance sunita aka kusum and dr. mehra come to the show not knowing that vikram is the artist performing. kusum hears him singing a song dedicated to love but feels insulted that someone who has forgotten his love would sing a song for love. so she begins to sing against him despite promising herself that she would never sing again. hearing her voice reminds vikram of sunita's voice and he continuously re-listens to her voice's recordings.
the next day he arrives at kusum's house and asks her to sing with him on stage. she refuses. he offers her money to sing with him, again she refuses and angrily tells him to leave the house. assuring her that he will return in the evening in case she has changed her mind, he leaves. as he had promised he returns in the evening, dr. mehra meets him and asks why he wants only kusum's voice, but before vicky can reply the servant comes and tells them that kusum is not at home. vikram leaves once again. dr. mehra gets angry with kusum and asks her why she is doing what she is doing. why would she not confront vikram and why she still looks at him through the window. the next day when kusum leaves the house vikram is waiting outside in the car for her. he gives her a lift and on the way once again they are faced with a similar situation to the accident that had taken away sunita's identity. she screams and loses consciousness.
a few days later when vikram goes to see how kusum is, he finds out that kusum had previously gone through a similar accident as the day when she had fainted. kusum also asks about an injury on vikram's forehead, one that he had received during his accident. vikram tells her about his accident and about how he has forgotten everything. this angers kusum further as she believes that vikram has forgotten her and she accidentally spills every detail she knows about the accident itself. sometime later vikram's mother finds out that he wants to do a show with a girl called kusum and he won't marry until this is done. therefore, sharda goes to kusum's house and asks her to sing with vicky and also tells her everything about how she had lied to vicky about sunita's death and why vikram had decided to marry rita. kusum is happy to hear that vicky has not forgotten her and that he still loves her and is making an orphanage in her memory. she is satisfied with this, agrees to sing with vikram and agrees to not get in the way of vikram and rita's wedding.
dr. mehra calls sharda to his hospital and explains to her how he had given sunita a new face after her disfigurement. he tells her how sunita and kusum are the same person and how kusum is satisfied only by the fact that vikram still loves her. mehra tells sharda there is still time, and that she can still reunite the two lovers. sharda doesn't listen to him. kusum sings with vikram and also reminds him of sunita by dancing the way they both would while singing their song "yeh vaada raha". all of this reminds vikram of sunita and at the end of the performance he holds her and calls her sunita, at which kusum runs away.
back home, she packs her bags and leaves for kashmir asking her father not to tell vikram anything. vikram comes seeking sunita and confronts mehra. mehra tells him to ask his mother for answers. vicky goes to sharda and asks her whether kusum is sunita. his mother tells vikram everything - about how she lied to him about sunita being dead because she wanted to protect him and make his future better, etc. vikram goes to kashmir to find sunita and finds her right outside her house. when she sees him she runs to the temple where they made their vows. at the temple they repeat their vows again and embrace each other.


== cast ==
shammi kapoor as dr. mehra (cosmetic surgeon)
rakhee gulzar as mrs. sharda rai bahadur
rishi kapoor  as vikram rai bahadur
poonam dhillon as sunita sikkan
tina munim as kusum mehra / sunita sikkan (after plastic surgery)
rakesh bedi as gogi
sarika as rita saxena
gulshan bawra as sunita's uncle
jaya bhaduri as sunita (voice)
iftekhar as dr. sahni
hari shivdasani as pannalal saxena
sunder as constable


== songs ==
music: r. d. burman & lyrics: gulshan bawra.


== notes ==

2. http://www.bollywoodlife.com/news-gossip/before-amitabh-bachchan-jaya-bachchan-had-lent-her-voice-to-two-actress/


== external links ==
yeh vaada raha at imdb