yeh hai mumbai meri jaan (transl.this is mumbai, my sweetheart) is a 1999 indian hindi-language film directed by mahesh bhatt and produced by mukesh bhatt, starring saif ali khan, twinkle khanna, akshay anand and chunky pandey. the film was flop at the box office.


== plot ==
yeh hai mumbai meri jaan is a love story between saif ali khan and twinkle khanna while akshay anand is the spoiler.
the film is a remake of michael j. fox's 1987 movie the secret of my success. saif plays raju tarachand a small-town guy who has come to mumbai to try his luck in the corporate world. on his arrival he gets duped of his car and luggage by chali (chunky pandey). he goes to mr. malhotra's office and convinces him to grant him a job. when he finds out that he has been hired as a lowly peon, he quits thinking this is beneath him. he changes his mind when he sees that the beautiful jasmine (twinkle khanna) also works there, in hope of catching her eye.
mr. malhotra is having problems in his company that, unknown to anyone, are caused by his brother papaji (avtar gill). he has placed a spy, m.r. poplet (girish dhamija), to sabotage the company so that he (papaji) can take it over. malhotra hires a corporate p.i., david rathod, to help him, but rathod gets held up. raju grabs this opportunity to get close to jasmine and apply his training to set the company right while trying to maintain his job as the peon.
how this convoluted thing gets resolved is the story of the movie.


== cast ==
saif ali khan ... raju tarachand / husna bano / david rathod
twinkle khanna ... jasmin arora
chunky pandey ... chali d'souza
saurabh shukla ... mr. malhotra "chhotey"
akshay anand ... david rathod / jo jo vaswani
avtar gill ...  malhotra's brother "papaji"
girish dhamija ...  m.r. poplet
sanjeeva vatsa  (as sanjiva vatsa)
savita karle
ramesh rai
gautam saugat
krishna bhatt
abbas ali moghul  (as abbas ali)
tanuja chandra ...  chachi chunchi
sanjay jha
khalid siddiqui  (as khalid)
dolly powari
deepak tijori ...  dancer at parsi party
shruti ulfat ...  dancer at parsi party


== soundtrack ==


== trivia ==
the film was announced as mr. aashiq and the audio released under that name. when the film got delayed, its producers changed its title and released it as yeh hai mumbai meri jaan.
this was another movie where saif played a role originally played by michael j. fox. earlier he had played fox's role of the movie star from the hard way in his main khilari tu anari.


== external links ==
yeh hai mumbai meri jaan at imdb