yeh dillagi is an 1994 indian hindi-language romantic comedy-drama film directed by naresh malhotra and produced by yash chopra for his production company yash raj films. based on the 1954 american film sabrina, its story revolves on two brothers (akshay kumar and saif ali khan) who fall in love with their family driver's daughter, sapna (kajol), a successful model.
yeh dillagi was released on 6 may 1994. it emerged as a commercial success, grossing 10.8 crore against its 1.6 crore budget, and received positive response from critics. at the 40th filmfare awards, the film was nominated for four category: best actor (kumar), best actress (kajol), best music director (dilip sen, sameer sen) and best male playback singer (abhijeet for the song "ole ole"). the film was later remade in telugu as priya o priya.


== plot ==
vikram and vijay are both heirs to saigal industries (headed by their father bhanupratap). vijay spends all his time working and vikram is a flirt. vikram notices sapna when she becomes a successful model. however, sapna's success does not change the fact that she is a driver's daughter. mrs. shanti devi, vijay and vikram's mother, may overlook her son's affairs with rich girls, but not with a driver's daughter. as vijay tries to help, he finds himself falling in love with sapna, too. before it is too late, sapna falls in love with him, too, and the pair decides to get married.
on vikram's birthday, vijay comes back with sapna and sees his brother (vikram) has changed. the man who used to be a flirt now does not drink liquor, smoke cigarettes, or flirt with girls. the only one he sees is sapna. the boys talk: both want to marry sapna. vikram mistakenly thinks that his brother supports his pursuit of sapna.
one afternoon, vikram goes out for lunch with vijay and sapna. in the middle of their journey, they have a flat tire, and vijay tries to fix it. instead, the jack breaks and vikram offers to get one from a garage. sapna realizes that vikram wants to marry her at that point and starts to cry, so vijay tries to calm her down by giving her a hug. just then, vikram arrives and realises that there is a connection between his brother and sapna. he returns home drunk. their mother has had enough and tells sapna's father to tell her to go back to bombay or get fired.
sapna storms off with her dad to the train station. vikram threatens to commit suicide if his mother does not accept sapna as her daughter-in-law; his mother accepts. sapna returns and vikram sacrifices his love for his brother. vikram is seen driving and comes across a girl named anjali. he instantly falls for her.


== cast ==
credits adapted from box office india.

karisma kapoor made a special appearance.


== music ==
the film's soundtrack album contains seven songs composed by dilip sen-sameer sen. the song "ole ole", sung by abhijeet was a hit. the other artists who contributed to this album are lata mangeshkar, kumar sanu, pankaj udhas and udit narayan.
it became one of the top three best-selling bollywood soundtrack albums of 1994, with 4.5 million sales. the song 'ole ole' was remixed in the comedy film jawaani jaaneman


== release and reception ==
made on a budget of 1.6 million (us$22,000), yeh dillagi was released on 6 may 1994. according to the film-trade website box office india, the film opened to a wide audience and emerged as a commercial success and one of the highest-grossing films of 1994. distributed by eros international, it was released on dvd on 8 october 2007 in a single-disc pack. it was available for streaming on amazon prime video and apple tv+ since 23 may 2017.yeh dillagi received positive reception from critics. on 3 june 1994, the indian express praised kajol's performance, saying that "[she] looks better than she did in baazigar and gives a belivable performance". a review published by india today on 15 june hailed: "after a season of psychopaths and avenging angels, finally, relief. here is romance, comedy and the foot-thumping ole ole." yeh dillagi received four nominations at the 40th filmfare awards, including best actor (akshay kumar), best actress (kajol), best music director (dilip sen, sameer sen) and best male playback singer (abhijeet for the song "ole ole").


== references ==


== external links ==
yeh dillagi at imdb