yeh jawaani hai deewani (transl. this youth is crazy) is a 2013 indian hindi-language coming-of-age romantic comedy-drama film, directed by ayan mukerji, written by mukerji and hussain dalal, and produced by karan johar. it stars ranbir kapoor and deepika padukone in their second film together after 2008's bachna ae haseeno. kalki koechlin and aditya roy kapur play supporting roles. initially set for a march 2013 release, the film was released on 31 may 2013. upon release, it was a box office success. it was a very popular film amongst the youth. since its release in 2013, the film has gone on to achieve cult status. in the 59th filmfare awards, the film received the highest number of nominations (nine) including best film, best actor for kapoor, best direction for mukherji, best supporting actor for kapoor, best supporting actress for koechlin and soon. yeh jawaani hai deewani has become one of the highest grossing indian films of all time. it was the third film to cross 3 billion worldwide after 3 idiots. it was also the tenth highest grossing bollywood film in overseas markets at the time of release.


== plot ==
naina talwar (deepika padukone) is a medical student absorbed in her studies. she tops her classes but feels like an outcast due to her introverted nature. an encounter with an old classmate, aditi mehra (kalki koechlin), makes her realize that she wants more from life than high marks. thus, she makes an impulsive decision to follow aditi on a hiking trip into the himalayas, up to manali. during the hike, she renews her friendship with other former classmates, kabir thapar 'bunny' (ranbir kapoor) and avinash arora 'avi' (aditya roy kapur). bunny is a charmer whose dream is to wander and discover the world and has no interest in ever settling down.
throughout the trek, bunny and naina grow closer. one night, the two climb a mountain and naina sees a new side of bunny, causing her to grow feelings for him. meanwhile, aditi grows jealous of lara (evelyn sharma), one of their acquaintances, as avi flirts with her a lot. bunny and naina realize that aditi has feelings for avi, but keep quiet. at the end of the trip, naina is close to telling bunny that she has feelings for him, but is interrupted by avi who reveals bunny was accepted into the graduate school of journalism at northwestern university in chicago. naina realizes that love and marriage have no part in bunny's plans and remains silent but is happy for him as he is following his passion.
eight years later, naina has finished medical school and is now working in a clinic. bunny works as a videographer for a travel show on fox network and travels the world as he had always wanted. he receives an offer to become a host for a new travel show, which he accepts. he also receives a wedding invitation from aditi  revealing that she is marrying a man named taran khanna (kunaal roy kapur). bunny arrives to the wedding destination and while the girls are happy to see him, avi isn't due to avi trying to contact bunny a lot of times while he was out of the country but bunny being busy with his own career, had unconsciously avoided avi and aditi's calls. it is later revealed through an argument between avi and bunny that bunny's father (farooq sheikh) had passed away and since bunny had been in a remote area, he couldn't make it to his father's last rites.
naina's feelings for bunny grow once again, and bunny finds himself falling in love with her too. naina, however, doesn't want to get her heartbroken again. leading herself to avoid hang-outs with bunny. bunny sees naina with another man, naina's friend, vikram (rana daggubati) and feels jealous, causing bunny and naina to argue before kissing. they admit they have feelings for each other but neither is willing to give up a career to follow the other. naina says she is happy staying with her family, living her simple life and doesn't want to leave whereas bunny wants to see the world. bunny also confronts aditi about her crush on avi but she says that she has gotten over him and is happy with taran.
on the night of aditi's wedding, bunny leaves for paris. at the airport, he realizes what he is leaving behind and instead goes to his home, where he reconciles with his stepmother (tanvi azmi). on new year's eve, naina, alone at home, receives a surprise visit from bunny. he explains he has turned down his dream job to be with her and proposes spontaneously, but naina fears that he might regret his decision later. bunny counters that he is happy with her and wants to continue travelling, but with her, arguing that somehow they can make a life together. naina agrees, and they have a conference call with aditi and avi. they all wish each other happy new year and the film ends with bunny and naina embracing.


== cast ==
ranbir kapoor   as kabir "bunny" thapar
deepika padukone as naina talwar
aditya roy kapur as avinash "avi" arora
kalki koechlin as aditi mehra / aditi taran khanna
kunaal roy kapur as taran khanna
evelyn sharma as lara khanna
farooq sheikh as sanjay thapar, kabirs father
tanvi azmi as shivani thapar, kabirs stepmother
dolly ahluwalia as simran talwar, nainas mother
poorna jagannathan in a guest appearance as riyana sarai
rana daggubati in a cameo appearance as photographer vikram mehra
naveen kaushik as sumer kashyap
umar yadav as nanoo
omar khan as dev johnson
anisa butt as preeti salgaonkar
nupur joshi as esha
mayank saxena
mokshad dodwani
madhuri dixit as mohini in item number "ghagra".
kamal adib as mr. mehra, aditis father


== production ==
yeh jawaani hai deewani was produced by hiroo yash johar and karan johar under the banner of dharma productions. it was co-produced by apoorva mehta and utv motion pictures and written by hussain dalal based on a story by ayan mukerji. the title was taken from a hit song by the same title, with music by r. d. burman from the film jawani diwani (1972). in december 2011, pritam was chosen for the first time to compose the music for a dharma productions film, steering away from the usual vishal-shekhar and shankar-ehsaan-loy, who had previously scored director ayan mukerji's debut, wake up sid (2009).


=== filming ===
shooting locations included hidimba temple, gulaba, banjaar, hamta, and naggar. some shots were taken at 14,000 feet above sea level and the crew shot at a temperature as low as 10 degrees celsius. in may 2012, the cast filmed in udaipur, where kapoor and padukone also shot a romantic song. the wedding sequences were shot at the oberoi udaivilas hotel.the unit experienced a difficult shoot in rajasthan due to the overwhelming heat. filming also took place in august 2012 in paris, france on rue mouffetard, a street market and in nice, france. other scenes were shot in filmistan, mumbai. on 26 january, the crew visited kashmir to shoot a musical sequence and other scenes. they filmed in locations such as kongdori in gulmarg, pahalgam and srinagar.


=== casting ===
ranbir kapoor was the first to sign onto the film and was under ayan mukerji's direction for the second time following wake up sid. kapoor pierced his ears for his role. there was a lot of speculation as to who would play the female lead, with katrina kaif and anushka sharma being the choices. eventually, deepika padukone was chosen in september 2011, who due to her faith in ranbir and ayan accepted the film without even reading the script. aditya roy kapur and kalki koechlin were later signed on for pivotal roles. koechlin and kapur play aditi and avi, respectively. evelyn sharma had confirmed that she will play a ditzy character.


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack and background score was composed by pritam, with lyrics penned by amitabh bhattacharya except where noted. two songs  "badtameez dil", sung by benny dayal and shefali alvares, and "balam pichkari" sung by vishal dadlani and shalmali kholgade  were seen in the trailer. the promo video for "badtameez dil" was released on 5 april, the video for "balam pichkari" on 10 april, and the video for "dilliwaali girlfriend" on 25 april. the complete soundtrack was released on 29 april 2013.


== marketing ==
nokia india announced its association with dharma productions for the film. the official trailer was released by ayan mukerji, karan johar, ranbir kapoor and deepika padukone on 19 march 2013 at a press conference in mumbai. before its release, ranbir kapoor invited all of his fans to watch the trailer.


== pre-release business ==
the figures don't include the print and advertising (p&a) costs.


== release ==
preview screenings of yeh jawaani hai deewani were held on 30 may 2013. the film was released on 31 may 2013 worldwide and on around 3100 screens in india. the trailers of once upon a time in mumbaai again, satyagraha  democracy under fire and bhaag milkha bhaag were attached with the film prints.eros distributed yeh jawaani hai deewani in israel. it was subtitled in hebrew and released on 31 may 2013. the last bollywood film released in israel was devdas.
hindu college organised a special screening of yeh jawaani hai deewani to create a secure and safe environment for female students on 31 may 2013.


=== critical reception ===
giving 4 out of 5 stars, taran adarsh of bollywoodhungama.com noted that it "is a revitalizing take on romance and relationships. a wonderful cinematic experience, this one should strike a chord with not just the youth, but cineastes of all age-groups."shubhra gupta of indian express with a negative tone stated that, "yeh jawaani hai deewani is a been-here, seen-this, much-too-long glossy creature, and not much else." saibal chatterjee of ndtv rated it 3.5/5 and opined that, "overlong, sluggish and fluffy, it meanders through varied locations as the young lovers/friends seek to reconnect with each other after a few years of being apart."
sukanya verma of rediff.com gave it 3.5/5 stars and judged, "yeh jaawani hai deewani is totally worth it!" alisha coelho of in.com praised kapoor's "ebullient" performance and gave it 3.5 stars out of 5. rajeev masand of cnn-ibn gave the film 3 out of 5 stars, concluding "if you are seeking light-hearted mush, you're looking in the right place". ananya bhattacharya of zeenews.com said the film "is no heavy or preachy business. it is meant to be enjoyed and it does its job well. apart from a few parts where the pace of the film drops badly, ayan mukherji's handiwork is a breezy, enjoyable one." she also gave it 3 out of 5 stars. tushar joshi of dna opined, "yjhd is a well written film that should be watched for its direction, treatment and some remarkable performances."anupama chopra of the hindustan times gave 2.5 out of 5 stars and wrote, "there is enough eye-candy in yeh jawaani hai deewani to see you through, but i wish the film had more meat and less dressing. i'm disappointed because there is a truckload of talent here. what rankles is what might have been." raja sen of rediff.com noted that the film was good-looking but lacked a good story. he gave it 2 out of 5 stars.


== controversies ==
jammu and kashmir chief minister omar abdullah expressed his displeasure over the attribution of shots in yeh jawaani hai deewani to manali while they were filmed in north kashmir's gulmarg. he stated that apart from the temple and span resort, all scenes were shot in gulmarg. many scenes and song sequences of the movie were shot at locations in the kashmir valley including the famous ski-resort of gulmarg and pahalgam. karan johar's production house later said that the opening credit slate clearly mentions chief minister omar abdullah, tourism minister ga mir and inspector-general of police sm sahal. the names of the entire crew in kashmir are mentioned in the film credits.the film's television release had been stalled. the delhi high court on 11 june 2013 issued a ruling restraining the tv release of yeh jawaani hai deewani for allegedly using objectionable dialogues in context of the brand rooh afza.


== box office ==


=== india ===
yeh jawaani hai deewani opened strongly with around 100% occupancy at multiplexes and in the range of 6070% at single screens where it set the biggest opening for a ranbir kapoor film. it holds the records for the fourth biggest opening of all time and highest for a non-holiday release after collecting 198 million (us$2.8 million) on its first day. the film remained strong on saturday and grossed 205 million (us$2.9 million). it made 630 million (us$8.8 million) on its first weekend, breaking the 3-day weekend box office record previously held by dabangg 2. the film remained strong on monday and grossed the second highest ever monday collection of 128 million (us$1.8 million). it continued its successful run on tuesday collecting 118 million (us$1.7 million) and wednesday collecting 105 million (us$1.5 million), which is the highest ever for any film on that day, bringing its six-day total to 980 million (us$14 million).yeh jawaani hai deewani grossed 1.06 billion (us$15 million) in its first week, becoming the second fastest bollywood film to cross 1 billion (us$14 million) behind ek tha tiger. it grossed 1.75 billion (us$25 million) worldwide in the first seven days. the film made 283 million (us$4.0 million), in its second weekend, which is the second highest of all time, making its ten-day gross to 1.34 billion (us$19 million). it had grossed 450 million (us$6.3 million) in its second week, bringing its total to 1.52 billion (us$21 million). it also had a very good third weekend gross of 135 million (us$1.9 million) taking its 17 days total to 1.65 billion (us$23 million). it grossed 205 million (us$2.9 million) in its third week making its total to 1.73 billion (us$24 million). yeh jawaani hai deewani grossed 1.76 billion (us$25 million) after its fourth weekend. yeh jawaani hai deewani added 65.4 million (us$920,000) taking its four-week total to 1.77 billion (us$25 million). due to a huge reduction of shows from the fifth week, its lifetime total finished around 1.9 billion (equivalent to 2.0 billion or us$29 million in 2019).


=== overseas ===
yeh jawaani hai deewani collected around $4 million on its international opening weekend and is ranked no. 2 in 2013. the film collected $1,568,677 at the us box office, opening in at no. 9 position with an average of $9,743 from 161 theatres. it continued its successful run and netted around $7.5 million in ten days. yeh jawaani hai deewani grossed $8.75 million in 17 days in overseas. it grossed $9.50 million in 24 days in overseas. yeh jawaani hai deewani finished at $10.50 million approx.


== home media ==
the film was made available on netflix and prime video.


== awards and nominations ==


== references ==


== external links ==
official website
yeh jawani hai deewani at internet movie database
yeh jawaani hai deewani at box office mojo
yeh jawaani hai deewani at rotten tomatoes