you must be joking! is a 1965 british comedy film directed by michael winner and starring michael callan, lionel jeffries, and denholm elliott.


== plot ==
four british soldiers - sergeant major mcgregor (complete with kilt and bearskin), captain tabasco, father of nine sergeant clegg, staff sergeant mansfield - and united states air force lieutenant morton have their initiative tested in a scavenger hunt, set for them by a british army psychologist, major foskett (terry-thomas). 
they are instructed to obtain six symbols of the british way of life. the reward for the winner is to be fast-tracked for promotion and a ten-day, all-expenses-paid trip around the world for two. among the feats to be accomplished within 48 hours are escaping from a maze, retrieving a rare rose and the mascot from a rolls-royce motorcar, and procurement of a lock of hair and an autograph from a popular french singer. the final challenge involves the famous lutine bell from the underwriting room of lloyd's of london. because of complaints in the past, if any of them get into trouble, the authorities will deny everything. they are ordered to wear civilian clothes and leave behind all their money.


== cast ==
michael callan - lieutenant tim morton
lionel jeffries - sergeant major mcgregor
denholm elliott - captain tabasco
wilfrid hyde-white - general lockwood
bernard cribbins - sergeant clegg
terry-thomas - major foskett
james robertson justice - librarian
gabriella licudi - annabelle nash
leslie phillips - young husband
gwendolyn watts - young wife
patricia viterbo - sylvie tarnet
lee montague - staff sergeant mansfield
irene handl - elderly woman
richard wattis - parkins
miles malleson - salesman
clive dunn - doorman
tracy reed - poppy pennington
james villiers - bill simpson
graham stark - mcgregor's suez comrade
ronald howard - cecil
arthur lowe - husband
joan benham - wife
lance percival - shifty man
peter bull - ferocious man in library
peter barkworth - recording studio manager
norman vaughan - norman stone
jon pertwee - greyhound storeman
peter gilmore - soldier
dave watts keyboards - ricky ticky taylor pop star


== production ==
the film was based on an original story by michael winner which was inspired by a real army initiative test where soldiers were asked to get as far away as possible from their camp at catterick. he hired alan hackney, who had written several boulting brothers screenplays, to write the script.while looking for finance, winner was approached to make a movie with the dave clark five but winner did not like the idea. charles h. schneer liked the hackney script and agreed to make it under a deal he had with columbia and winner says he suggested john boorman take over the dave clark movie. winner said columbia insisted that michael callan play a lead role. winner called the actor "a nice fellow who didn't sell the film in america and didn't help it in england either."winner hired a cameraman who felt they could not film in the locations that had been chosen, so winner replaced him with geoff unsworth. johnny speight did some uncredited writing on the film.


== reception ==
winner says the film received good reviews but was not popular at the box-office.
tv guide called the film: "lunacy and laughs galore, with director winner's gimmicky style much in evidence."
hal erickson wrote in the new york times: "director michael winner was still in his 'mad mod' period when he lensed the wacky goings-on of you must be joking? his death wish pictures of the 1970s were in 1965 as remote as another galaxy."


== references ==

winner, michael (2004). winner take all: a life of sorts (kindle ed.).


== external links ==
you must be joking! at imdb