you were meant for me is a 1948 musical film directed by lloyd bacon and starring dan dailey and jeanne crain as a bandleader and his wife. it was released by 20th century fox. marilyn monroe may have worked on the film as an uncredited extra. the film includes performances of "you were meant for me", "i'll get by (as long as i have you)", and "ain't misbehavin'".


== plot summary ==
chuck arnold (dan dailey) is a bandleader during the 1920s. he meets hometown girl peggy mayhew (jeanne crain), a flapper script girl, at one of the band's presentations, and the next day, they get married. though she loves him, life on the road becomes increasingly difficult for her, and eventually, with the onset of the great depression, in 1929, she tires of it, and returns to her country home. unable to find new bookings, he soon joins her, and brings with him oscar hoffman (oscar levant) his acerbic, cynical manager. the bandleader finds the pastoral life a crashing bore, and so, he heads for the big city to find fortune. this time, he succeeds, and happiness is the result.


== cast ==
jeanne crain as peggy mayhew
dan dailey as chuck arnold
oscar levant as oscar hoffman
barbara lawrence as louise crane
selena royle as mrs. cora mayhew
percy kilbride as mr. andrew mayhew
herbert anderson as eddie
harry barris as harry, the pianist
marilyn monroe as undetermined minor role (unconfirmed, uncredited)


== soundtracks ==
concerto in f
music by george gershwin
happy days are here again
music by milton ager
lyrics by jack yellen
lilacs in the rain
music by peter de rose
you were meant for me
music by nacio herb brown
lyrics by arthur freed
if i had you
written by ted shapiro, jimmy campbell, and reginald connelly
can't sleep a wink
written by charles henderson
crazy rhythm
music by joseph meyer and roger wolfe kahn
lyrics by irving caesar
i'll get by
music by fred e. ahlert
lyrics by roy turk
good night, sweetheart
written by ray noble, jimmy campbell, and reginald connelly
ain't misbehavin'
music by fats waller and harry brooks
lyrics by andy razaf
ain't she sweet?
music by milton ager
lyrics by jack yellen


== see also ==
"you were meant for me" (1929 song), a pop standard written by arthur freed and nacio herb brown.
"i'll get by (as long as i have you)" (1928 song), a pop standard written by fred e. ahlert and roy turk.
"ain't misbehavin'" (1929 song), a slide/jazz standard written by fats waller, harry brooks, and andy razaf.


== references ==


== external links ==
you were meant for me at imdb
you were meant for me at allmovie
you were meant for me at the tcm movie database
you were meant for me at the american film institute catalog