yuvaraju  (transl.prince) is a 2000 telugu-language romantic drama film directed and produced by y. v. s. chowdary. the film stars mahesh babu, simran and sakshi shivanand. this film gave mahesh babu the tag "prince", as yuvaraju means prince. it was dubbed into tamil as sammatham tharuvala and in hindi as ek aur rajkumar.


== plot ==
srinivas (mahesh babu) has just returned to india and joins a college in hyderabad. there, he meets his classmate srivalli (sakshi shivanand), a young beautiful girl with whom he falls in love. srivalli has a childhood friend, vamsi (venkat) abroad, whom she regards as her best friend and keeps him close to her heart as when a plane crashed 20 years back, these two are the only survivors of the tragedy.
finally srinivas and srivalli comes to know that they are in love with each other. they break the news followed by a lavish engagement ceremony. for the placid viewers then comes the excitement in the form of srilata (simran), who arrives in nick of time to attend the engagement. srivalli comes to know that srinivas and srilata know each other since they met in abroad few years ago, from the brief observation at her engagement ceremony.
srilata has a son named teja whom srinivas befriends. he comes to know that his father does not live with them. later during an outing he teja plays a tune which was taught to him by his mother saying it's his dad's tune. here srinivas gets to know that teja is his son.
he goes to srilata who tells him during an outing years back, they were given a drink by the tribals and didn't know what happened. she came to know in 3 months but couldn't find him. now he wants to tell srivalli the truth but srilata makes him promise on his son's photo that he won't tell anything. teja gets to know the truth. both srinivas and teja come close during the days. srinivas has after thoughts about his marriage as he wants his son. vamsi loves srivalli and comes to the marriage to win her.
as the marriage day emerges srilata can't bear to see the marriage, so she tries to leave. teja wants to see his father before leaving. srivalli gets to know the truth by a letter written by teja. srinivas tries to stop them at airport where they get to know she has taken poison. srivalli also reaches there and they take her to hospital during which rowdies attack them.
she is taken to hospital and then later it is shown as the srinivas and srilata along with their son are leaving the house on a trip.


== cast ==
mahesh babu as srinivas / sri
sakshi sivanand as srivalli
simran as srilata
sivaji
ali as baba sehgal
venu madhav as sehgal baba
venkat as vamsi
chandra mohan
bandla ganesh
varsha
ramya sri as college lecturer
master sajja teja as teja
baby sridivya as kalpana


== soundtrack ==
the soundtrack of this film was composed by ramana gogula, which was a huge hit. this album consisted of 11 tracks (indeed a huge number) including 2 instrumentals. the soundtrack featured eminent singers like s. p. balasubrahmanyam, k. s. chithra, hariharan, shankar mahadevan, udit narayan, sunitha upadrashta, anuradha sriram, nanditha and ramana gogula himself. especially the songs "guntalakidi", "haira debba", "manesemo" and "tholivalape" were huge hits. the lyrics were written by veturi sundara rama murthy.


== reviews ==
idlebrain rated this film 3/5. fullhyd rated it 7/10. telugucinema stated that movie is average.


== references ==


== external links ==
yuvaraju at imdb