zaalim is a 1994 indian film directed by sikander bharti. it stars akshay kumar, madhoo, vishnuvardhan, ranjeet, and alok nath.


== plot ==
judge somnath lives with his wife, three sons, and a daughter. two of his sons, vikram and mohan are married, while his daughter, kaamna, and youngest son, ravi, are of marriageable age. somnath had wanted his sons to be a doctor, police officer and a judge. while vikram is a surgeon, mohan is a police inspector and ravi is now studying law and on his way to become a lawyer and then a judge like his dad. the family have a dark secret. ravi is prone to losing his temper, so much so that he gets out of control, and has killed someone in his childhood. when kaamna gets raped, the family is reluctant to tell ravi. when they do, they convince him to control himself, while mohan gets an arrest warrant for vinod, kaamna's molester. things do not go smoothly in court as the matter is put off for several months and then somnath and kaamna are killed in a bomb explosion. now mohan and vikram handcuff ravi on their balcony while they finalize the funeral arrangements, and when they return ravi is no longer there. and then the killings begin...


== cast ==
akshay kumar... ravi
madhoo... madhu
vishnuvardhan... inspector mohan
navneet nishan...roopa,mohan wife
arun bakshi... dr. vikram
alok nath... judge somnath
padmarani...judge somnath wife
ananya khare ....kaamna
ranjeet... ranjit
mohan joshi... jaikaal
arjun firoz khan... vinod jaikaal
tiku talsania....madhu's dad
sabeeha as kavita (item dance)


== soundtrack ==
" bombay se rail chali" - anu malik, alisha chinai
"chaar din ka safar" - suresh wadkar, kavita krishnamurthy
"chaar din ka safar (sad)" - suresh wadkar
"mubarak ho mohabbat gungunati hai" - kumar sanu, alka yagnik
"mubarak ho mohabbat gungunati hai v2" - kumar sanu
"pehle hi qayamat kya kam thi" - vinod rathod, alka yagnik
"roses are red" - alisha chinai, abhijeet
"soti reh gayee saari duniya" - ila arun


== external links ==
zaalim at imdb